MR. STIVER'S HORSE

 BY JAMES MONTGOMERY BAILEY

 The other morning at breakfast Mrs. Perkins observed that Mr. Stiver, in
whose house we live, had been called away, and wanted to know if I would
see to his horse through the day.

 I knew that Mr. Stiver owned a horse, because I occasionally saw him
drive out of the yard, and I saw the stable every day,â€”but what kind of
a horse I didn't know. I never went into the stable, for two reasons: in
the first place, I had no desire to; and, secondly, I didn't know as the
horse cared particularly for company.

 I never took care of a horse in my life; and, had I been of a less
hopeful nature, the charge Mr. Stiver had left with me might have had a
very depressing effect; but I told Mrs. Perkins I would do it.

 "You know how to take care of a horse, don't you?" said she.

 I gave her a reassuring wink. In fact, I knew so little about it that I
didn't think it safe to converse more fluently than by winks.

 After breakfast I seized a toothpick and walked out towards the stable.
There was nothing particular to do, as Stiver had given him his
breakfast, and I found him eating it; so I looked around. The horse
looked around, too, and stared pretty hard at me. There was but little
said on either side. I hunted up the location of the feed, and then sat
down on a peck measure and fell to studying the beast. There is a wide
difference in horses. Some of them will kick you over and never look
around to see what becomes of you. I don't like a disposition like that,
and I wondered if Stiver's horse was one of them.

 When I came home at noon I went straight to the stable. The animal was
there all right. Stiver hadn't told me what to give him for dinner, and
I had not given the subject any thought; but I went to the oat-box and
filled the peck measure and sallied boldly up to the manger.

 When he saw the oats he almost smiled; this pleased and amused him. I
emptied them into the trough, and left him above me to admire the way I
parted my hair behind. I just got my head up in time to save the whole
of it. He had his ears back, his mouth open, and looked as if he were on
the point of committing murder. I went out and filled the measure again,
and climbed up the side of the stall and emptied it on top of him. He
brought his head up so suddenly at this that I immediately got down,
letting go of everything to do it. I struck on the sharp edge of a
barrel, rolled over a couple of times, then disappeared under a
hay-cutter. The peck measure went down on the other side, and got
mysteriously tangled up in that animal's heels, and he went to work at
it, and then ensued the most dreadful noise I ever heard in all my life,
and I have been married eighteen years.

 It did seem as if I never would get out from under that hay-cutter; and
all the while I was struggling and wrenching myself and the cutter
apart, that awful beast was kicking around in the stall, and making the
most appalling sound imaginable.

 When I got out I found Mrs. Perkins at the door. She had heard the
racket, and had sped out to the stable, her only thought being of me and
three stove-lids which she had under her arm, and one of which she was
about to fire at the beast.

 This made me mad.

 "Go away, you unfortunate idiot!" I shouted: "do you want to knock my
brains out?" For I remembered seeing Mrs. Perkins sling a missile once
before, and that I nearly lost an eye by the operation, although
standing on the other side of the house at the time.

 She retired at once. And at the same time the animal quieted down, but
there was nothing left of that peck measure, not even the maker's name.

 I followed Mrs. Perkins into the house, and had her do me up, and then I
sat down in a chair and fell into a profound strain of meditation. After
a while I felt better, and went out to the stable again. The horse was
leaning against the stable stall, with eyes half closed, and appeared to
be very much engrossed in thought.

 "Step off to the left," I said, rubbing his back.

 He didn't step. I got the pitchfork and punched him in the leg with the
handle. He immediately raised up both hind legs at once, and that fork
flew out of my hands, and went rattling up against the timbers above,
and came down again in an instant, the end of the handle rapping me with
such force on the top of the head that I sat right down on the floor
under the impression that I was standing in front of a drug-store in the
evening. I went back to the house and got some more stuff on me. But I
couldn't keep away from that stable. I went out there again. The thought
struck me that what the horse wanted was exercise. If that thought had
been an empty glycerin-can, it would have saved a windfall of luck for
me.

 But exercise would tone him down, and exercise him I should. I laughed
to myself to think how I would trounce him around the yard. I didn't
laugh again that afternoon. I got him unhitched, and then wondered how I
was to get him out of the stall without carrying him out. I pushed, but
he wouldn't budge. I stood looking at him in the face, thinking of
something to say, when he suddenly solved the difficulty by veering
about and plunging for the door. I followed, as a matter of course,
because I had a tight hold on the rope, and hit about every
partition-stud worth speaking of on that side of the barn. Mrs. Perkins
was at the window and saw us come out of the door. She subsequently
remarked that we came out skipping like two innocent children. The
skipping was entirely unintentional on my part. I felt as if I stood on
the verge of eternity. My legs may have skipped, but my mind was filled
with awe.

 I took the animal out to exercise him. He exercised me before I got
through with it. He went around a few times in a circle; then he stopped
suddenly, spread out his forelegs, and looked at me. Then he leaned
forward a little, and hoisted both hind legs, and threw about two
coal-hods of mud over a line full of clothes Mrs. Perkins had just hung
out.

 That excellent lady had taken a position at the window, and, whenever
the evolutions of the awful beast permitted, I caught a glance of her
features. She appeared to be very much interested in the proceedings;
but the instant that the mud flew, she disappeared from the window, and
a moment later she appeared on the stoop with a long poker in her hand,
and fire enough in her eye to heat it red-hot.

 Just then Stiver's horse stood up on his hind legs and tried to hug me
with the others. This scared me. A horse never shows his strength to
such advantage as when he is coming down on you like a frantic
pile-driver. I in stantly dodged, and the cold sweat fairly boiled out
of me.

 It suddenly came over me that I had once figured in a similar position
years ago. My grandfather owned a little white horse that would get up
from a meal at Delmonico's to kick the President of the United States.
He sent me to the lot one day, and unhappily suggested that I often went
after that horse and suffered all kinds of defeat in getting him out of
the pasture, but I had never tried to ride him. Heaven knows I never
thought of it. I had my usual trouble with him that day. He tried to
jump over me, and push me down in a mud-hole, and finally got up on his
hind legs and came waltzing after me with facilities enough to convert
me into hash, but I turned and just made for that fence with all the
agony a prospect of instant death could crowd into me. If our candidate
for the Presidency had run one-half as well, there would be seventy-five
postmasters in Danbury to-day, instead of one.

 I got him out finally, and then he was quiet enough, and I took him up
alongside the fence and got on him. He stopped an instant, one brief
instant, and then tore off down the road at a frightful speed. I lay
down on him and clasped my hands tightly around his neck, and thought of
my home. When we got to the stable I was confident he would stop, but he
didn't. He drove straight at the door. It was a low door, just high
enough to permit him to go in at lightning speed, but there was no room
for me. I saw if I struck that stable the struggle would be a very brief
one. I thought this all over in an instant, and then, spreading put my
arms and legs, emitted a scream, and the next moment I was bounding
about in the filth of that stable-yard. All this passed through my mind
as Stiver's horse went up into the air. It frightened Mrs. Perkins
dreadfully.  "Why, you old fool!" she said; "why don't you get rid of him?"

 "How can I?" said I, in desperation.

 "Why, there are a thousand ways," said she.

 This is just like a woman. How differently a statesman would have
answered!

 But I could think of only two ways to dispose of the beast. I could
either swallow him where he stood and then sit down on him, or I could
crawl inside of him and kick him to death.

 But I was saved either of these expedients by his coming towards me so
abruptly that I dropped the rope in terror, and then he turned about,
and, kicking me full of mud, shot for the gate, ripping the clothes-line
in two, and went on down the street at a horrible gallop, with two of
Mrs. Perkins' garments, which he hastily snatched from the line,
floating over his neck in a very picturesque manner.

 So I was afterwards told. I was too full of mud myself to see the way
into the house.

 Stiver got his horse all right, and stays at home to care for him. Mrs.
Perkins has gone to her mother's to recuperate, and I am healing as fast
as possible.