During the latter part of the reign of King Christian the Ninth,
there lived at Holl in the Tunga District a farmer named Brandur. By
the time the events narrated here transpired, Brandur had grown
prosperous and very old--old in years and old in ways. The
neighbours thought he must have money hidden away somewhere. But no
one knew anything definitely, for Brandur had always been reserved
and uncommunicative, and permitted no prying in his house or on his
possessions. There was, however, one thing every settler in those
parts knew: Brandur had accumulated large stores of various kinds.
Anyone passing along the highway could see that.

Brandur usually had some hay remaining in lofts and yards when
spring came, and, besides, there was the immense stack that stood on
a knoll out in the homefield before the house. It had been there for
many years and was well protected against wind and weather by a
covering of sod. Brandur had replenished the hay, a little at a
time, by using up that from one end only and filling in with fresh
hay the following summer.

Brandur was hospitable to such guests as had business with him, and
refused to accept payment for food or lodging; but very few people
ever came to see him, and these were mostly old friends with whom he
had financial dealings. Brandur was willing to make loans against
promissory notes and the payment of interest. There were not many to
whom he would entrust his money, however, and he never lost a penny.
Whenever these callers came, he would bring out the brandy bottle.

The buildings at Holl were all in a tumble-down state; the furniture
was no better. There wasn't a chair in the whole house; even the
ba√∞stofa had only a dirt floor, and it was entirely unsheathed on
the inside except for a few planks nailed on the wall from the bed
up as far as the rafters. The clock was the sole manufactured
article in the room. But friends of the old man knew that underneath
his bed he kept a fairly large carved wooden chest, bearing the
inscription anno 1670. The chest was heavy and was always kept
locked. Only the nearest of kin had ever seen its contents.

Brandur was not considered obliging; it was very difficult to get to
see him. Yet he was willing to sell food at any time for cash; hay,
too, as long as there was still some remaining in his lofts. He
would also sell hay against promises of lambs, especially wethers,
once it was certain that the cold of winter was past. But his old
haystack he refused to touch for anyone.

In this way Brandur stumbled down the pathway of life until he lost
his sight. Even then, he was still sound in mind and body. While his
vision remained unimpaired, it had been his habit to walk out to the
old haystack every day and stroll around it slowly, examining it
carefully from top to bottom and patting it with his hands. This
habit he kept up as long as the weather permitted him to be
outdoors, and he did not give it up even after his sight was gone.
He would still take his daily walk out to the haystack on the knoll,
drag himself slowly around it, groping with his hands to feel it, as
if he wished to make sure that it still stood there, firm as a rock
and untouched. He would stretch out his hands and touch its face and
count the strips of turf to himself in a whisper.

Brandur still tilled the land, though he kept but little help and
was living chiefly on the fruits of his former labours. He had fine
winter pastures, and good meadows quite near the house, from which
the hay could easily be brought in. The old man steadfastly refused
to adopt modern farming methods; he had never levelled off the
hummocks, nor drained or irrigated the land. But he did hire a few
harvest hands in the middle of the season, paying them in butter,
tallow, and the flesh of sheep bellies. The wages he paid were never
high, yet he always paid whatever had been agreed upon.

Old Brandur had been blessed with only one child, a daughter named
Gudrun. who had married a farmer in the district. Since his
daughter's marriage, Brandur kept a housekeeper and one farm hand, a
young man whom Brandur had reared and who, it was rumoured, was his
natural son. But that has nothing to do with the story.

When Brandur had reached a ripe old age, there came a winter with
much frost and snow. Time and again, some of the snow and ice would
thaw, but then a hard frost would come, glazing everything in an icy
coating. This went on until late in April. By that time, almost
every farmer in the district had used up his hay; every one of them
was at the end of his store, and nowhere was there a blade of grass
to feed the live-stock, for the land still lay frozen under its
blanket of hard-packed snow and ice. When things had come to this
pass, a general district meeting was called to discuss the situation
and decide what should be done. Brandur's son-in-law Jon was made
chairman of the meeting.

During the discussion it was brought to light that many of the
flocks would die of hunger unless 'God Almighty vouchsafed a turn in
the weather very soon', or Old Brandur could be induced to part with
his old hay. That stack would help, if properly divided among those
who were in greatest need. The quantity of hay it contained was
estimated, and the general opinion expressed that, if it were
divided, the flocks of every farmer in the district could be fed for
at least two weeks, even if they could not in that time be put out
to pasture.

Jon being chairman of the District Council, as well as Brandur's
son-in-law, it fell to his lot to go to the old man and ask for the
hay.

So it came about that, on his way home from the meeting, Jon stopped
at Holl. The day was cold and clear, the afternoon sun shining down
upon the snow-covered landscape. The icy blanket turned back the
rays of warmth as if it would have nothing to do with the sun. But
wherever rocks and gravelly banks protruded, the ice appeared to be
peeled off, for in those spots the sun's rays had melted it, though
only at mid-day and on the south. All streams and waterfalls
slumbered in silence under the snowy blanket. A chill silence
reigned over the whole valley. Not a bird was to be seen, not even a
snow bunting, only two ravens which kept flying from farmhouse to
farmhouse, and even their cawing had a hungry note.

When Jon rode up to the house at Holl, he found Brandur out by the
haystack. The old man was carefully groping his way around the
stack, feeling it on all sides and counting the strips of turf in so
loud a voice that Jon could hear him: O-n-e, t-w-o, three.

Jon dismounted and, going over to Brandur, saluted him with a kiss.

How are you? God bless you, said Brandur. And who may this be?

Jon of Bakki, replied the visitor.--Gudrun sends greetings.

Ah, yes. And how is my Gunna? Is she well?

She was well when I left home this morning. Now I am on my way back
from the meeting that was held to discuss the desperate situation--
you must have heard about it.

Yes, certainly. I've heard about it. I should say so! One can't get
away from talk of hay shortage and hard times. That is quite true.
Any other news?

Nothing worth mentioning, answered Jon. Nothing but the general hard
times and hay shortage. Every farmer at the end of his tether, or
almost there, no one with as much as a wisp of hay to spare, and
only a few likely to make out till Crouchmas without aid.

Too bad! said Brandur. Too bad! And he blew out his breath, as
though suffocating from strong smoke or bad air.

For a while there was silence, as if each mistrusted the other and
wondered what was in the air. Brandur stood there with one hand
resting on the haystack, while he thrust the other into his trousers
pocket, or underneath the flap of his trousers. He always wore the
old-fashioned trousers with a flap, in fact had never possessed any
other kind. Meanwhile, holding the reins, Jon stood there gazing at
the hay and making a mental estimate of it. Then he turned to his
father-in-law and spoke:

The purpose of my visit to you, my dear Brandur, is to ask that you
let us have this hay--this fine old hay that you have here. The
District Council will, of course, pay you; the parish will guarantee
payment. We have discussed that matter fully.

When Jon ceased speaking, Brandur blew the air from his mouth in
great puffs, as though deeply stabbed by a sharp pain in the heart.
For a while he held his peace. Then he spoke:

Not another word! Not another word! What's this I hear? My hay for
the district? My hay to supply all the farmers in the district? Do
you think for one moment that this little haystack is enough to feed
all the flocks in the whole district? Do you think this tiny haycock
will be enough for a whole parish? I think not!

But we have calculated it, protested Jon. We have estimated that the
hay in this stack will be enough to feed the flocks in the district
for about two weeks, if a little grain is used with it, and if the
hay is distributed equally among the farmers who need it most. There
may be enough for three weeks, should it turn to be as much as or
more than I expect. By that time, we surely hope, the season will be
so far advanced that the weather will have changed for the better.

So! You have already estimated the amount of hay in my stack! said
Brandur. You have already divided this miserable haycock among
yourselves, divided it down to the very last straw. And you have
weighed it almost to a gram. Then why speak to me about it? Why not
take it just as it is and scatter it to the four winds? Why not?--
The voice of the old man shook with anger.

No, said Jon. We will not do that. We want to ask your permission
first. We had no intention of doing otherwise; we intended to ask
you for the hay. And we did not mean to vex you, but rather to
honour you in this manner. Is it not an honour to be asked to save a
whole district from ruin?

Oh, so all this is being done to honour me! said the old man,
roaring with laughter. Perhaps you believe me to be in my second
childhood. Not at all! Old Brandur can still see beyond the tip of
his nose.

The cold-heartedness shown by the old man's laughter at the distress
of his fellowmen roused Jon's ire. He could see nothing laughable
about the desperate situation in the district.

Are you then going to refuse to let us have the hay, refuse to sell
it at full price, with the Parish Council guaranteeing payment? he
asked in a tone that was angry, yet under perfect control?--Is that
your final answer?

Yes, responded Brandur. That is my final answer. I will not let the
tiny mouthful of hay I have here go while there is still life in my
body, even though you mean to insure payment, and even though you
actually do guarantee payment. After all, who among you will be in a
position to guarantee payment if all the flocks die? The cold
weather may not let up until the first of June or even later. In
that case the sheep will all die. It won't go very far, this tiny
haycock, not for so many. It will not, I tell you.

But what are you going to do with the hay? If everyone else loses
his flocks, everyone but you, what enjoyment will there be in owning
it? And what benefit? asked Jon.

That does not concern me! replied the old man. That concerns them.
It was they who decided the size of the flocks they undertook to
feed this winter, not I. Besides, they could have cut as much hay as
I did, even more, for they still have their eyesight. Their failure
is due to their own laziness and bad judgment. That's what ails
them! Ruins them!

But you won't be able to take this great big haystack with you into
the life eternal, said Jon. The time is coming when you will have to
part with it. Then it will be used as the needs require. And what
good will it do you? What are you going to do with it?

I am going to keep it, answered Brandur. I intend to keep it right
here on the knoll, keep it in case the haying should be poor next
summer. There may be a poor growth of grass and a small hay crop;
there may be a volcanic eruption and the ashes may poison the grass,
as they have done in former years. Now, do you understand me?

So saying, Brandur tottered off towards the house to indicate that
the conversation was at an end. His countenance was as cold as the
sky in the evening after the sun has set, and the hard lines in it
resembled the streaks in the ice on rocks and ledges where the sun's
rays had shone that day and laid bare the frozen ground.

Brandur entered the house, while Jon mounted again. They scarcely
said a word of farewell, so angry were they both.

Jon's horse set off at a brisk pace, eager to reach home, and
galloped swiftly over the hard, frozen ground. After the sun had
gone down, the wind rose and a searing cold settled over the valley,
whitening Jon's moustache where his breath passed over it.

Jon's anger grew as he sped along. Naturally hightempered, he had
lately had many reasons for anger since he took over his official
duties. The people in his district were like people the world over:
they blamed the Board constantly, accusing it of stupidity and
favouritism. Yet most of them paid their taxes reluctantly and only
when long overdue. Sometimes they were almost a year in arrears.

Jon reviewed the matter of the hay in his mind, also the other
vexations of the past. He was sick and tired of all the trouble. And
now the life of the whole district hung on a thin thread, the fate
of which depended upon the whims of the weather. Jon's nose and
cheekbones smarted from the cold; his shoes were frozen stiff, and
pinched his feet, and his throat burned with the heat of anger
rising from his breast.

Jon was rather quiet when he reached home that evening, although he
did tell his wife of his attempt to deal with her father.

Yes, said Gudrun, papa sets great store by that hay. He cannot bear
to part with it at any price. That is his nature.

Tomorrow you must go, Jon told her, and try to win the old man over
in some way. I'd hate to be obliged to take the hay from him by
force, but that will be necessary if everything else fails.

The following day Gudrun went to see her father. The weather still
remained cold. When Gudrun dismounted before the house at Holl,
there was no one outside to greet her or announce her arrival, and
so she entered, going straight into the ba√∞stofa. There she found
her father sitting on his bed, knitting a seaman's mitten, crooning
an old ditty the while:

     Far from out the wilderness
      Comes raging the cold wind;
      And the bonds of heaven's king
      It doth still tighter bind.

Gudrun leaned over her father and kissed him.

Is that you, Gunna dear? he asked.

Yes papa, she said, at the same time slipping a flask of brandy into
the bosom of his shirt.

This greatly pleased the old man.

Gunna dear, he said, you always bring me something to cheer me up.
Not many nowadays take the trouble to cheer the old man. No indeed.
Any news? It's so long since you have been to see me, a year or
more.

No news everyone hasn't heard: hard times, shortage of hay, and
worry everywhere. That is only to be expected. It's been a hard
winter, the stock stall-fed for so long, at least sixteen weeks, on
some farms twenty.

Quite true, said Brandur. It's been a cold winter, and the end is
not yet. The cold weather may not break up before the first of June,
or even Midsummer Day. The summer will be cold, the hay crop small,
and the cold weather will probably set in again by the end of
August, then another cold hard winter, and ...

He meant to go on, foretelling yet worse things to come, but Gudrun
broke in: Enough of that, father. Things can't be as bad as that It
would be altogether too much. I hope for a change for the better
with the new moon next week, and mark you, the new moon rises in the
southwest and on a Monday; if I remember right, you always thought a
new moon coming on a Monday brought good weather.

I did, conceded Brandur. When I was a young man, a new moon coming
on a Monday was generally the very best kind of moon. But like
everything else, that has changed with the times. Now a Monday new
moon is the worst of all, no matter in what quarter of the heavens
it appears, if the weather is like this--raging sad carrying on so;
that is true.

But things are in a pitiful state, said Gudrun, what with the hay
shortage, almost everyone is badly off, and not a single farmer with
a scrap of hay to spare, except you, papa.

Yes, I! answered Brandur. I, a poor, blind, decrepit old man! But
what of you? Jon has enough hay, hasn't he? How is that? Doesn't he
have enough?

Yes, we do have enough for ourselves, admitted Gudrun. But we can't
hold onto it. Jon lends it to those in need until it is all gone and
there is none left for us. He thinks of others as well as of
himself.

What nonsense! What sense is there in acting like that? Every man
for himself, said the old man.

That's right. But for us that is not enough. Jon is in a position
where he must think of others; he has to think of all the farmers in
the district--and small thanks he gets for his pains. He is so
upset, almost always on tenterhooks. He didn't sleep a wink last
night--was almost beside himself. He takes it so hard.

So Jon couldn't sleep a wink last night! repeated Brandur. Why be so
upset? Why lie awake nights worrying about this? That doesn't help
matters any. It isn't his fault that they are all on the brink of
ruin.

Quite true, answered Gudrun. He is not to blame for that, and lying
awake nights doesn't help matters, but that is Jon's disposition.
He's tired to death of all the work for the Council and the
everlasting fault-finding. He has had to neglect his own farm since
he took up these public duties--and nothing for his time and
trouble. Now this is too much. He is dead tired of it all, and so am
I. In fact, I know it was worry about all this that kept Jon awake
last night. We have been thinking of getting away from it all when
spring comes and going to America.

Do you side with him in this? asked Brandur, grasping his daughter
by the arm. Do you, too, agree to his giving away the hay you need
for your own flocks, giving it away until you haven't enough for
yourselves? Do you, too, want to go to America, away from your
father who now has one foot in the grave?

Yes, I do, Gudrun replied. As a matter of fact, the plan was
originally mine. If our flocks die, there will be no alternative;
but if our sheep live and those of the neighbours die, our life will
not be worth living because of the poverty and want round about us.
Yes, papa, it was I suggested our going. I could see no other way
out.

On hearing this, Brandur's mood softened somewhat. I expected to be
allowed to pass my last days with you and your children, he said. I
cannot go on living in this fashion any longer.

Pass your last days with us! exclaimed Gudrun. Have you, then,
thought of leaving Holl? Have you planned to come and live with us?
You've never said a word of this to me.

I have no intention of leaving Holl. That I have never meant to do.
But that is not necessary. I thought you might perhaps be willing to
move over here and live with me. I could then let you have what
miserable little property I have left, Gunna, my dear.

And what about the hay, papa? Will you turn the hay over to us, the
hay in the old stack? Everything depends on that.

The hay! The hay! the old man said. Still harping on the hay--the
hay which doesn't amount to anything and cannot be of any real help.
It's sheer nonsense to think that the hay in that stack is enough to
feed the flocks of a whole district. There is no use talking about
it I will not throw that tiny mouthful to all the four winds. It
will do no good if divided among so many, but it is a comfort to me,
to me alone. No, I will not part with it as long as there is a spark
of life in me. That I will not, my love.

Brandur turned pale and the lines in his face became hard and rigid.
Looking at him, Gudrun knew from experience that he was not to be
shaken in his determination when in this mood. His face was like a
sky over the wilderness streaked with threatening storm clouds.

Gudrun gave up. The tears rushed to her eyes, as she twined her arms
around her father's neck and said: Goodbye, papa. Forgive me if I
have angered you. I shall not come here again.

The old man felt the teardrops on his face, the heavy woman's tears,
hot with anger and sorrow.

Gudrun dashed out of the room and mounted. Brandur was left alone in
the darkness at mid-day. Yet in his mind's eye he could see the
haystack out on the knoll. He rose and went out to feel it. It was
still there. Gudrun had not ridden away with it. Brandur could hear
the horseshoes crunching the hard, frozen ground as Gudrun rode off.
He stood motionless for a long time, listening to the hoof beats.
Then he went into the house.

Brandur felt restless. He paced the floor awhile, stopped for a
moment to raise to his lips the flask his daughter had brought him,
and drained it at one gulp. All that day he walked the floor,
fighting with himself until night fell.

Then he sent his foster-son with a message to his daughter. Jon, he
said, had his permission to haul the hay away the very next day, but
it was all to be removed in one day; there was not to be a scrap of
hay or a lump of sod left by evening.

But the weather changes quickly, says an old Icelandic adage. By
morning, the weather had turned its spindle and the wind shifted to
the south. Jon sent no message to anyone, nor did he proclaim that
the old hay was available. He first wished to see what the thaw
would amount to. By the following day, the whole valley was
impassable because of slush and water, and the patches of earth
appearing through the snowy blanket grew larger almost hourly.

Meanwhile, Brandur roamed through the house all day long, asking if
anyone had come.--Aren't they going to take away these miserable hay
scraps? About time they came and got them!--He seemed eager that the
hay be removed at once.

That day he did not take his usual walk out to the stack to feel the
hay. In fact, after that no one ever saw him show attachment to the
old hay. His love of it seemed to have died the moment he granted
his son-in-law permission to take it away.

That spring Brandur gave up housekeeping and of his own volition
turned over the farm to his daughter and son-in-law. With them he
lived to enjoy many years of good health. Never again did he take
his daily walk out to the haystack to feel the hay. But he was able
to take his sip of brandy to his dying day and repeat to himself the
word of God--hymns and verses from the Bible.

Now he has passed on to eternity. But his memory lives like a stone-
-a large, moss-covered stone by the wayside.




J√≥n TRAUSTI