DR. HEIDEGGER'S EXPERIMENT.

 That very singular man old Dr. Heidegger once invited four venerable
friends to meet him in his study. There were three white-bearded
gentlemen—Mr. Medbourne, Colonel Killigrew and Mr. Gascoigne—and a
withered gentlewoman whose name was the widow Wycherly. They were all
melancholy old creatures who had been unfortunate in life, and whose
greatest misfortune it was that they were not long ago in their
graves. Mr. Medbourne, in the vigor of his age, had been a prosperous
merchant, but had lost his all by a frantic speculation, and was now
little better than a mendicant. Colonel Killigrew had wasted his best
years and his health and substance in the pursuit of sinful pleasures
which had given birth to a brood of pains, such as the gout and divers
other torments of soul and body. Mr. Gascoigne was a ruined
politician, a man of evil fame—or, at least, had been so till time
had buried him from the knowledge of the present generation and made
him obscure instead of infamous. As for the widow Wycherly, tradition
tells us that she was a great beauty in her day, but for a long while
past she had lived in deep seclusion on account of certain scandalous
stories which had prejudiced the gentry of the town against her. It is
a circumstance worth mentioning that each of these three old
gentlemen—Mr. Medbourne, Colonel Killigrew and Mr. Gascoigne—were
early lovers of the widow Wycherly, and had once been on the point of
cutting each other's throats for her sake. And before proceeding
farther I will merely hint that Dr. Heidegger and all his four guests
were sometimes thought to be a little beside themselves, as is not
infrequently the case with old people when worried either by present
troubles or woeful recollections.

 "My dear old friends," said Dr. Heidegger, motioning them to be
seated, "I am desirous of your assistance in one of those little
experiments with which I amuse myself here in my study."

 If all stories were true, Dr. Heidegger's study must have been a very
curious place. It was a dim, old-fashioned chamber festooned with
cobwebs and besprinkled with antique dust. Around the walls stood
several oaken bookcases, the lower shelves of which were filled with
rows of gigantic folios and black-letter quartos, and the upper with
little parchment-covered duodecimos. Over the central bookcase was a
bronze bust of Hippocrates, with which, according to some authorities,
Dr. Heidegger was accustomed to hold consultations in all difficult
cases of his practice. In the obscurest corner of the room stood a
tall and narrow oaken closet with its door ajar, within which
doubtfully appeared a skeleton. Between two of the bookcases hung a
looking-glass, presenting its high and dusty plate within a tarnished
gilt frame. Among many wonderful stories related of this mirror, it
was fabled that the spirits of all the doctor's deceased patients
dwelt within its verge and would stare him in the face whenever he
looked thitherward. The opposite side of the chamber was ornamented
with the full-length portrait of a young lady arrayed in the faded
magnificence of silk, satin and brocade, and with a visage as faded as
her dress. Above half a century ago Dr. Heidegger had been on the
point of marriage with this young lady, but, being affected with some
slight disorder, she had swallowed one of her lover's prescriptions
and died on the bridal-evening. The greatest curiosity of the study
remains to be mentioned: it was a ponderous folio volume bound in
black leather, with massive silver clasps. There were no letters on
the back, and nobody could tell the title of the book. But it was well
known to be a book of magic, and once, when a chambermaid had lifted
it merely to brush away the dust, the skeleton had rattled in its
closet, the picture of the young lady had stepped one foot upon the
floor and several ghastly faces had peeped forth from the mirror,
while the brazen head of Hippocrates frowned and said, "Forbear!"

 Such was Dr. Heidegger's study. On the summer afternoon of our tale a
small round table as black as ebony stood in the centre of the room,
sustaining a cut-glass vase of beautiful form and elaborate
workmanship. The sunshine came through the window between the heavy
festoons of two faded damask curtains and fell directly across this
vase, so that a mild splendor was reflected from it on the ashen
visages of the five old people who sat around. Four champagne-glasses
were also on the table.

 "My dear old friends," repeated Dr. Heidegger, "may I reckon on your
aid in performing an exceedingly curious experiment?"

 Now, Dr. Heidegger was a very strange old gentleman whose eccentricity
had become the nucleus for a thousand fantastic stories. Some of these
fables—to my shame be it spoken—might possibly be traced back to
mine own veracious self; and if any passages of the present tale
should startle the reader's faith, I must be content to bear the
stigma of a fiction-monger.

 When the doctor's four guests heard him talk of his proposed
experiment, they anticipated nothing more wonderful than the murder of
a mouse in an air-pump or the examination of a cobweb by the
microscope, or some similar nonsense with which he was constantly in
the habit of pestering his intimates. But without waiting for a reply
Dr. Heidegger hobbled across the chamber and returned with the same
ponderous folio bound in black leather which common report affirmed to
be a book of magic. Undoing the silver clasps, he opened the volume
and took from among its black-letter pages a rose, or what was once a
rose, though now the green leaves and crimson petals had assumed one
brownish hue and the ancient flower seemed ready to crumble to dust in
the doctor's hands.

 "This rose," said Dr. Heidegger, with a sigh—"this same withered and
crumbling flower—blossomed five and fifty years ago. It was given me
by Sylvia Ward, whose portrait hangs yonder, and I meant to wear it in
my bosom at our wedding. Five and fifty years it has been treasured
between the leaves of this old volume. Now, would you deem it possible
that this rose of half a century could ever bloom again?"

 "Nonsense!" said the widow Wycherly, with a peevish toss of her head.
"You might as well ask whether an old woman's wrinkled face could ever
bloom again."

 "See!" answered Dr. Heidegger. He uncovered the vase and threw the
faded rose into the water which it contained. At first it lay lightly
on the surface of the fluid, appearing to imbibe none of its moisture.
Soon, however, a singular change began to be visible. The crushed and
dried petals stirred and assumed a deepening tinge of crimson, as if
the flower were reviving from a deathlike slumber, the slender stalk
and twigs of foliage became green, and there was the rose of half a
century, looking as fresh as when Sylvia Ward had first given it to
her lover. It was scarcely full-blown, for some of its delicate red
leaves curled modestly around its moist bosom, within which two or
three dewdrops were sparkling.

 "That is certainly a very pretty deception," said the doctor's
friends—carelessly, however, for they had witnessed greater miracles
at a conjurer's show. "Pray, how was it effected?"

 "Did you never hear of the Fountain of Youth?" asked Dr. Heidegger,
"which Ponce de Leon, the Spanish adventurer, went in search of two or
three centuries ago?"

 "But did Ponce de Leon ever find it?" said the widow Wycherly.

 "No," answered Dr. Heidegger, "for he never sought it in the right
place. The famous Fountain of Youth, if I am rightly informed, is
situated in the southern part of the Floridian peninsula, not far from
Lake Macaco. Its source is overshadowed by several gigantic magnolias
which, though numberless centuries old, have been kept as fresh as
violets by the virtues of this wonderful water. An acquaintance of
mine, knowing my curiosity in such matters, has sent me what you see
in the vase."

 "Ahem!" said Colonel Killigrew, who believed not a word of the
doctor's story; "and what may be the effect of this fluid on the human
frame?"

 "You shall judge for yourself, my dear colonel," replied Dr.
Heidegger.—"And all of you, my respected friends, are welcome to so
much of this admirable fluid as may restore to you the bloom of youth.
For my own part, having had much trouble in growing old, I am in no
hurry to grow young again. With your permission, therefore, I will
merely watch the progress of the experiment."

 While he spoke Dr. Heidegger had been filling the four
champagne-glasses with the water of the Fountain of Youth. It was
apparently impregnated with an effervescent gas, for little bubbles
were continually ascending from the depths of the glasses and bursting
in silvery spray at the surface. As the liquor diffused a pleasant
perfume, the old people doubted not that it possessed cordial and
comfortable properties, and, though utter sceptics as to its
rejuvenescent power, they were inclined to swallow it at once. But Dr.
Heidegger besought them to stay a moment.

 "Before you drink, my respectable old friends," said he, "it would be
well that, with the experience of a lifetime to direct you, you should
draw up a few general rules for your guidance in passing a second time
through the perils of youth. Think what a sin and shame it would be
if, with your peculiar advantages, you should not become patterns of
virtue and wisdom to all the young people of the age!"

 The doctor's four venerable friends made him no answer except by a
feeble and tremulous laugh, so very ridiculous was the idea that,
knowing how closely Repentance treads behind the steps of Error, they
should ever go astray again.

 "Drink, then," said the doctor, bowing; "I rejoice that I have so well
selected the subjects of my experiment."

 With palsied hands they raised the glasses to their lips. The liquor,
if it really possessed such virtues as Dr. Heidegger imputed to it,
could not have been bestowed on four human beings who needed it more
woefully. They looked as if they had never known what youth or
pleasure was, but had been the offspring of Nature's dotage, and
always the gray, decrepit, sapless, miserable creatures who now sat
stooping round the doctor's table without life enough in their souls
or bodies to be animated even by the prospect of growing young again.
They drank off the water and replaced their glasses on the table.

 Assuredly, there was an almost immediate improvement in the aspect of
the party—not unlike what might have been produced by a glass of
generous wine—together with a sudden glow of cheerful sunshine,
brightening over all their visages at once. There was a healthful
suffusion on their cheeks instead of the ashen hue that had made them
look so corpse-like. They gazed at one another, and fancied that some
magic power had really begun to smooth away the deep and sad
inscriptions which Father Time had been so long engraving on their
brows. The widow Wycherly adjusted her cap, for she felt almost like a
woman again.

 "Give us more of this wondrous water," cried they, eagerly. "We are
younger, but we are still too old. Quick! give us more!"

 "Patience, patience!" quoth Dr. Heidegger, who sat, watching the
experiment with philosophic coolness. "You have been a long time
growing old; surely you might be content to grow young in half an
hour. But the water is at your service." Again he filled their glasses
with the liquor of youth, enough of which still remained in the vase
to turn half the old people in the city to the age of their own
grandchildren.

 While the bubbles were yet sparkling on the brim the doctor's four
guests snatched their glasses from the table and swallowed the
contents at a single gulp. Was it delusion? Even while the draught was
passing down their throats it seemed to have wrought a change on their
whole systems. Their eyes grew clear and bright; a dark shade deepened
among their silvery locks: they sat around the table three gentlemen
of middle age and a woman hardly beyond her buxom prime.

 "My dear widow, you are charming!" cried Colonel Killigrew, whose eyes
had been fixed upon her face while the shadows of age were flitting
from it like darkness from the crimson daybreak.

 The fair widow knew of old that Colonel Killigrew's compliments were
not always measured by sober truth; so she started up and ran to the
mirror, still dreading that the ugly visage of an old woman would meet
her gaze.

 Meanwhile, the three gentlemen behaved in such a manner as proved that
the water of the Fountain of Youth possessed some intoxicating
qualities—unless, indeed, their exhilaration of spirits were merely a
lightsome dizziness caused by the sudden removal of the weight of
years. Mr. Gascoigne's mind seemed to run on political topics, but
whether relating to the past, present or future could not easily be
determined, since the same ideas and phrases have been in vogue these
fifty years. Now he rattled forth full-throated sentences about
patriotism, national glory and the people's right; now he muttered
some perilous stuff or other in a sly and doubtful whisper, so
cautiously that even his own conscience could scarcely catch the
secret; and now, again, he spoke in measured accents and a
deeply-deferential tone, as if a royal ear were listening to his
well-turned periods. Colonel Killigrew all this time had been trolling
forth a jolly bottle-song and ringing his glass in symphony with the
chorus, while his eyes wandered toward the buxom figure of the widow
Wycherly. On the other side of the table, Mr. Medbourne was involved
in a calculation of dollars and cents with which was strangely
intermingled a project for supplying the East Indies with ice by
harnessing a team of whales to the polar icebergs. As for the widow
Wycherly, she stood before the mirror courtesying and simpering to her
own image and greeting it as the friend whom she loved better than all
the world besides. She thrust her face close to the glass to see
whether some long-remembered wrinkle or crow's-foot had indeed
vanished; she examined whether the snow had so entirely melted from
her hair that the venerable cap could be safely thrown aside. At last,
turning briskly away, she came with a sort of dancing step to the
table.

 "My dear old doctor," cried she, "pray favor me with another glass."

 "Certainly, my dear madam—certainly," replied the complaisant doctor.
"See! I have already filled the glasses."

 There, in fact, stood the four glasses brimful of this wonderful
water, the delicate spray of which, as it effervesced from the
surface, resembled the tremulous glitter of diamonds.

 It was now so nearly sunset that the chamber had grown duskier than
ever, but a mild and moonlike splendor gleamed from within the vase
and rested alike on the four guests and on the doctor's venerable
figure. He sat in a high-backed, elaborately-carved oaken arm-chair
with a gray dignity of aspect that might have well befitted that very
Father Time whose power had never been disputed save by this fortunate
company. Even while quaffing the third draught of the Fountain of
Youth, they were almost awed by the expression of his mysterious
visage. But the next moment the exhilarating gush of young life shot
through their veins. They were now in the happy prime of youth. Age,
with its miserable train of cares and sorrows and diseases, was
remembered only as the trouble of a dream from which they had joyously
awoke. The fresh gloss of the soul, so early lost and without which
the world's successive scenes had been but a gallery of faded
pictures, again threw its enchantment over all their prospects. They
felt like new-created beings in a new-created universe.

 "We are young! We are young!" they cried, exultingly.

 Youth, like the extremity of age, had effaced the strongly-marked
characteristics of middle life and mutually assimilated them all. They
were a group of merry youngsters almost maddened with the exuberant
frolicsomeness of their years. The most singular effect of their
gayety was an impulse to mock the infirmity and decrepitude of which
they had so lately been the victims. They laughed loudly at their
old-fashioned attire—the wide-skirted coats and flapped waistcoats of
the young men and the ancient cap and gown of the blooming girl. One
limped across the floor like a gouty grandfather; one set a pair of
spectacles astride of his nose and pretended to pore over the
black-letter pages of the book of magic; a third seated himself in an
arm-chair and strove to imitate the venerable dignity of Dr.
Heidegger. Then all shouted mirthfully and leaped about the room.

 The widow Wycherly—if so fresh a damsel could be called a
widow—tripped up to the doctor's chair with a mischievous merriment
in her rosy face.

 "Doctor, you dear old soul," cried she, "get up and dance with me;"
and then the four young people laughed louder than ever to think what
a queer figure the poor old doctor would cut.

 "Pray excuse me," answered the doctor, quietly. "I am old and
rheumatic, and my dancing-days were over long ago. But either of these
gay young gentlemen will be glad of so pretty a partner."

 "Dance with me, Clara," cried Colonel Killigrew.

 "No, no! I will be her partner," shouted Mr. Gascoigne.

 "She promised me her hand fifty years ago," exclaimed Mr. Medbourne.

 They all gathered round her. One caught both her hands in his
passionate grasp, another threw his arm about her waist, the third
buried his hand among the glossy curls that clustered beneath the
widow's cap. Blushing, panting, struggling, chiding, laughing, her
warm breath fanning each of their faces by turns, she strove to
disengage herself, yet still remained in their triple embrace. Never
was there a livelier picture of youthful rivalship, with bewitching
beauty for the prize. Yet, by a strange deception, owing to the
duskiness of the chamber and the antique dresses which they still
wore, the tall mirror is said to have reflected the figures of the
three old, gray, withered grand-sires ridiculously contending for the
skinny ugliness of a shrivelled grandam. But they were young: their
burning passions proved them so.

 Inflamed to madness by the coquetry of the girl-widow, who neither
granted nor quite withheld her favors, the three rivals began to
interchange threatening glances. Still keeping hold of the fair prize,
they grappled fiercely at one another's throats. As they struggled to
and fro the table was overturned and the vase dashed into a thousand
fragments. The precious Water of Youth flowed in a bright stream
across the floor, moistening the wings of a butterfly which, grown old
in the decline of summer, had alighted there to die. The insect
fluttered lightly through the chamber and settled on the snowy head of
Dr. Heidegger.

 "Come, come, gentlemen! Come, Madam Wycherly!" exclaimed the doctor.
"I really must protest against this riot."

 They stood still and shivered, for it seemed as if gray Time were
calling them back from their sunny youth far down into the chill and
darksome vale of years. They looked at old Dr. Heidegger, who sat in
his carved armchair holding the rose of half a century, which he had
rescued from among the fragments of the shattered vase. At the motion
of his hand the four rioters resumed their seats—the more readily
because their violent exertions had wearied them, youthful though they
were.

 "My poor Sylvia's rose!" ejaculated Dr. Heidegger, holding it in the
light of the sunset clouds. "It appears to be fading again."

 And so it was. Even while the party were looking at it the flower
continued to shrivel up, till it became as dry and fragile as when the
doctor had first thrown it into the vase. He shook off the few drops
of moisture which clung to its petals.

 "I love it as well thus as in its dewy freshness," observed he,
pressing the withered rose to his withered lips.

 While he spoke the butterfly fluttered down from the doctor's snowy
head and fell upon the floor. His guests shivered again. A strange
dullness—whether of the body or spirit they could not tell—was
creeping gradually over them all. They gazed at one another, and
fancied that each fleeting moment snatched away a charm and left a
deepening furrow where none had been before. Was it an illusion? Had
the changes of a lifetime been crowded into so brief a space, and were
they now four aged people sitting with their old friend Dr. Heidegger?

 "Are we grown old again so soon?" cried they, dolefully.

 In truth, they had. The Water of Youth possessed merely a virtue more
transient than that of wine; the delirium which it created had
effervesced away. Yes, they were old again. With a shuddering impulse
that showed her a woman still, the widow clasped her skinny hands
before her face and wished that the coffin-lid were over it, since it
could be no longer beautiful.

 "Yes, friends, ye are old again," said Dr. Heidegger, "and, lo! the
Water of Youth is all lavished on the ground. Well, I bemoan it not;
for if the fountain gushed at my very doorstep, I would not stoop to
bathe my lips in it—no, though its delirium were for years instead of
moments. Such is the lesson ye have taught me."

 But the doctor's four friends had taught no such lesson to themselves.
They resolved forthwith to make a pilgrimage to Florida and quaff at
morning, noon and night from the Fountain of Youth.

 

 

  Legends of the Province-House.

 I.—Howe's Masquerade. 

II.—Edward Randolph's Portrait. 

III.—Lady Eleanore's Mantle. 

IV.—Old Esther Dudley.

 

  I. 

 

HOWE'S MASQUERADE.

 One afternoon last summer, while walking along Washington street, my
eye was attracted by a sign-board protruding over a narrow archway
nearly opposite the Old South Church. The sign represented the front
of a stately edifice which was designated as the "OLD PROVINCE HOUSE,
kept by Thomas Waite." I was glad to be thus reminded of a purpose,
long entertained, of visiting and rambling over the mansion of the old
royal governors of Massachusetts, and, entering the arched passage
which penetrated through the middle of a brick row of shops, a few
steps transported me from the busy heart of modern Boston into a small
and secluded court-yard. One side of this space was occupied by the
square front of the Province House, three stories high and surmounted
by a cupola, on the top of which a gilded Indian was discernible, with
his bow bent and his arrow on the string, as if aiming at the
weathercock on the spire of the Old South. The figure has kept this
attitude for seventy years or more, ever since good Deacon Drowne, a
cunning carver of wood, first stationed him on his long sentinel's
watch over the city.

 The Province House is constructed of brick, which seems recently to
have been overlaid with a coat of light-colored paint. A flight of red
freestone steps fenced in by a balustrade of curiously wrought iron
ascends from the court-yard to the spacious porch, over which is a
balcony with an iron balustrade of similar pattern and workmanship to
that beneath. These letters and figures—"16 P.S. 79"—are wrought
into the ironwork of the balcony, and probably express the date of the
edifice, with the initials of its founder's name.

 A wide door with double leaves admitted me into the hall or entry, on
the right of which is the entrance to the bar-room. It was in this
apartment, I presume, that the ancient governors held their levees
with vice-regal pomp, surrounded by the military men, the counsellors,
the judges, and other officers of the Crown, while all the loyalty of
the province thronged to do them honor. But the room in its present
condition cannot boast even of faded magnificence. The panelled
wainscot is covered with dingy paint and acquires a duskier hue from
the deep shadow into which the Province House is thrown by the brick
block that shuts it in from Washington street. A ray of sunshine never
visits this apartment any more than the glare of the festal torches
which have been extinguished from the era of the Revolution. The most
venerable and ornamental object is a chimney-piece set round with
Dutch tiles of blue-figured china, representing scenes from Scripture,
and, for aught I know, the lady of Pownall or Bernard may have sat
beside this fireplace and told her children the story of each blue
tile. A bar in modern style, well replenished with decanters, bottles,
cigar-boxes and network bags of lemons, and provided with a beer-pump
and a soda-fount, extends along one side of the room.

 At my entrance an elderly person was smacking his lips with a zest
which satisfied me that the cellars of the Province House still hold
good liquor, though doubtless of other vintages than were quaffed by
the old governors. After sipping a glass of port-sangaree prepared by
the skilful hands of Mr. Thomas Waite, I besought that worthy
successor and representative of so many historic personages to conduct
me over their time-honored mansion. He readily complied, but, to
confess the truth, I was forced to draw strenuously upon my
imagination in order to find aught that was interesting in a house
which, without its historic associations, would have seemed merely
such a tavern as is usually favored by the custom of decent city
boarders and old-fashioned country gentlemen. The chambers, which were
probably spacious in former times, are now cut up by partitions and
subdivided into little nooks, each affording scanty room for the
narrow bed and chair and dressing-table of a single lodger: The great
staircase, however, may be termed, without much hyperbole, a feature
of grandeur and magnificence. It winds through the midst of the house
by flights of broad steps, each flight terminating in a square
landing-place, whence the ascent is continued toward the cupola. A
carved balustrade, freshly painted in the lower stories, but growing
dingier as we ascend, borders the staircase with its quaintly twisted
and intertwined pillars, from top to bottom. Up these stairs the
military boots, or perchance the gouty shoes, of many a governor have
trodden as the wearers mounted to the cupola which afforded them so
wide a view over their metropolis and the surrounding country. The
cupola is an octagon with several windows, and a door opening upon the
roof. From this station, as I pleased myself with imagining, Gage may
have beheld his disastrous victory on Bunker Hill (unless one of the
tri-mountains intervened), and Howe have marked the approaches of
Washington's besieging army, although the buildings since erected in
the vicinity have shut out almost every object save the steeple of the
Old South, which seems almost within arm's length. Descending from the
cupola, I paused in the garret to observe the ponderous white-oak
framework, so much more massive than the frames of modern houses, and
thereby resembling an antique skeleton. The brick walls, the materials
of which were imported from Holland, and the timbers of the mansion,
are still as sound as ever, but, the floors and other interior parts
being greatly decayed, it is contemplated to gut the whole and build a
new house within the ancient frame-and brickwork. Among other
inconveniences of the present edifice, mine host mentioned that any
jar or motion was apt to shake down the dust of ages out of the
ceiling of one chamber upon the floor of that beneath it.

 We stepped forth from the great front window into the balcony where in
old times it was doubtless the custom of the king's representative to
show himself to a loyal populace, requiting their huzzas and tossed-up
hats with stately bendings of his dignified person. In those days the
front of the Province House looked upon the street, and the whole site
now occupied by the brick range of stores, as well as the present
court-yard, was laid out in grass-plats overshadowed by trees and
bordered by a wrought-iron fence. Now the old aristocratic edifice
hides its time-worn visage behind an upstart modern building; at one
of the back windows I observed some pretty tailoresses sewing and
chatting and laughing, with now and then a careless glance toward the
balcony. Descending thence, we again entered the bar-room, where the
elderly gentleman above mentioned—the smack of whose lips had spoken
so favorably for Mr. Waite's good liquor—was still lounging in his
chair. He seemed to be, if not a lodger, at least a familiar visitor
of the house who might be supposed to have his regular score at the
bar, his summer seat at the open window and his prescriptive corner at
the winter's fireside. Being of a sociable aspect, I ventured to
address him with a remark calculated to draw forth his historical
reminiscences, if any such were in his mind, and it gratified me to
discover that, between memory and tradition, the old gentleman was
really possessed of some very pleasant gossip about the Province
House. The portion of his talk which chiefly interested me was the
outline of the following legend. He professed to have received it at
one or two removes from an eye-witness, but this derivation, together
with the lapse of time, must have afforded opportunities for many
variations of the narrative; so that, despairing of literal and
absolute truth, I have not scrupled to make such further changes as
seemed conducive to the reader's profit and delight.

  At one of the entertainments given at the province-house during the
latter part of the siege of Boston there passed a scene which has
never yet been satisfactorily explained. The officers of the British
army and the loyal gentry of the province, most of whom were collected
within the beleaguered town, had been invited to a masqued ball, for
it was the policy for Sir William Howe to hide the distress and danger
of the period and the desperate aspect of the siege under an
ostentation of festivity. The spectacle of this evening, if the oldest
members of the provincial court circle might be believed, was the most
gay and gorgeous affair that had occurred in the annals of the
government. The brilliantly-lighted apartments were thronged with
figures that seemed to have stepped from the dark canvas of historic
portraits or to have flitted forth from the magic pages of romance, or
at least to have flown hither from one of the London theatres without
a change of garments. Steeled knights of the Conquest, bearded
statesmen of Queen Elizabeth and high-ruffed ladies of her court were
mingled with characters of comedy, such as a parti-colored Merry
Andrew jingling his cap and bells, a Falstaff almost as provocative of
laughter as his prototype, and a Don Quixote with a bean-pole for a
lance and a pot-lid for a shield.

 But the broadest merriment was excited by a group of figures
ridiculously dressed in old regimentals which seemed to have been
purchased at a military rag-fair or pilfered from some receptacle of
the cast-off clothes of both the French and British armies. Portions
of their attire had probably been worn at the siege of Louisburg, and
the coats of most recent cut might have been rent and tattered by
sword, ball or bayonet as long ago as Wolfe's victory. One of these
worthies—a tall, lank figure brandishing a rusty sword of immense
longitude—purported to be no less a personage than General George
Washington, and the other principal officers of the American army,
such as Gates, Lee, Putnam, Schuyler, Ward and Heath, were represented
by similar scarecrows. An interview in the mock-heroic style between
the rebel warriors and the British commander-in-chief was received
with immense applause, which came loudest of all from the loyalists of
the colony.

 There was one of the guests, however, who stood apart, eying these
antics sternly and scornfully at once with a frown and a bitter smile.
It was an old man formerly of high station and great repute in the
province, and who had been a very famous soldier in his day. Some
surprise had been expressed that a person of Colonel Joliffe's known
Whig principles, though now too old to take an active part in the
contest, should have remained in Boston during the siege, and
especially that he should consent to show himself in the mansion of
Sir William Howe. But thither he had come with a fair granddaughter
under his arm, and there, amid all the mirth and buffoonery, stood
this stern old figure, the best-sustained character in the masquerade,
because so well representing the antique spirit of his native land.
The other guests affirmed that Colonel Joliffe's black puritanical
scowl threw a shadow round about him, although, in spite of his sombre
influence, their gayety continued to blaze higher, like—an ominous
comparison—the flickering brilliancy of a lamp which has but a little
while to burn.

 Eleven strokes full half an hour ago had pealed from the clock of the
Old South, when a rumor was circulated among the company that some new
spectacle or pageant was about to be exhibited which should put a
fitting close to the splendid festivities of the night.

 "What new jest has Your Excellency in hand?" asked the Reverend Mather
Byles, whose Presbyterian scruples had not kept him from the
entertainment. "Trust me, sir, I have already laughed more than
beseems my cloth at your Homeric confabulation with yonder ragamuffin
general of the rebels. One other such fit of merriment, and I must
throw off my clerical wig and band."

 "Not so, good Dr. Byles," answered Sir William Howe; "if mirth were a
crime, you had never gained your doctorate in divinity. As to this new
foolery, I know no more about it than yourself—perhaps not so much.
Honestly, now, doctor, have you not stirred up the sober brains of
some of your countrymen to enact a scene in our masquerade?"

 "Perhaps," slyly remarked the granddaughter of Colonel Joliffe, whose
high spirit had been stung by many taunts against New England—"perhaps
we are to have a masque of allegorical figures—Victory with trophies
from Lexington and Bunker Hill, Plenty with her overflowing horn to
typify the present abundance in this good town, and Glory with a
wreath for His Excellency's brow."

 Sir William Howe smiled at words which he would have answered with one
of his darkest frowns had they been uttered by lips that wore a beard.
He was spared the necessity of a retort by a singular interruption. A
sound of music was heard without the house, as if proceeding from a
full band of military instruments stationed in the street, playing,
not such a festal strain as was suited to the occasion, but a slow
funeral-march. The drums appeared to be muffled, and the trumpets
poured forth a wailing breath which at once hushed the merriment of
the auditors, filling all with wonder and some with apprehension. The
idea occurred to many that either the funeral procession of some great
personage had halted in front of the province-house, or that a corpse
in a velvet-covered and gorgeously-decorated coffin was about to be
borne from the portal. After listening a moment, Sir William Howe
called in a stern voice to the leader of the musicians, who had
hitherto enlivened the entertainment with gay and lightsome melodies.
The man was drum-major to one of the British regiments.

 "Dighton," demanded the general, "what means this foolery? Bid your
band silence that dead march, or, by my word, they shall have
sufficient cause for their lugubrious strains. Silence it, sirrah!"

 "Please, Your Honor," answered the drum-major, whose rubicund visage
had lost all its color, "the fault is none of mine. I and my band are
all here together, and I question whether there be a man of us that
could play that march without book. I never heard it but once before,
and that was at the funeral of his late Majesty, King George II."

 "Well, well!" said Sir William Howe, recovering his composure; "it is
the prelude to some masquerading antic. Let it pass."

 A figure now presented itself, but among the many fantastic masks that
were dispersed through the apartments none could tell precisely from
whence it came. It was a man in an old-fashioned dress of black serge
and having the aspect of a steward or principal domestic in the
household of a nobleman or great English landholder. This figure
advanced to the outer door of the mansion, and, throwing both its
leaves wide open, withdrew a little to one side and looked back toward
the grand staircase, as if expecting some person to descend. At the
same time, the music in the street sounded a loud and doleful summons.
The eyes of Sir William Howe and his guests being directed to the
staircase, there appeared on the uppermost landing-place, that was
discernible from the bottom, several personages descending toward the
door. The foremost was a man of stern visage, wearing a
steeple-crowned hat and a skull-cap beneath it, a dark cloak and huge
wrinkled boots that came halfway up his legs. Under his arm was a
rolled-up banner which seemed to be the banner of England, but
strangely rent and torn; he had a sword in his right hand and grasped
a Bible in his left. The next figure was of milder aspect, yet full of
dignity, wearing a broad ruff, over which descended a beard, a gown of
wrought velvet and a doublet and hose of black satin; he carried a
roll of manuscript in his hand. Close behind these two came a young
man of very striking countenance and demeanor with deep thought and
contemplation on his brow, and perhaps a flash of enthusiasm in his
eye; his garb, like that of his predecessors, was of an antique
fashion, and there was a stain of blood upon his ruff. In the same
group with these were three or four others, all men of dignity and
evident command, and bearing themselves like personages who were
accustomed to the gaze of the multitude. It was the idea of the
beholders that these figures went to join the mysterious funeral that
had halted in front of the province-house, yet that supposition seemed
to be contradicted by the air of triumph with which they waved their
hands as they crossed the threshold and vanished through the portal.

 "In the devil's name, what is this?" muttered Sir William Howe to a
gentleman beside him. "A procession of the regicide judges of King
Charles the martyr?"

 "These," said Colonel Joliffe, breaking silence almost for the first
time that evening—"these, if I interpret them aright, are the
Puritan governors, the rulers of the old original democracy of
Massachusetts—Endicott with the banner from which he had torn the
symbol of subjection, and Winthrop and Sir Henry Vane and Dudley,
Haynes, Bellingham and Leverett."

 "Why had that young man a stain of blood upon his ruff?" asked Miss
Joliffe.

 "Because in after-years," answered her grandfather, "he laid down the
wisest head in England upon the block for the principles of liberty."

 "Will not Your Excellency order out the guard?" whispered Lord Percy,
who, with other British officers, had now assembled round the general.
"There may be a plot under this mummery."

 "Tush! we have nothing to fear," carelessly replied Sir William Howe.
"There can be no worse treason in the matter than a jest, and that
somewhat of the dullest. Even were it a sharp and bitter one, our best
policy would be to laugh it off. See! here come more of these gentry."

 Another group of characters had now partly descended the staircase.
The first was a venerable and white-bearded patriarch who cautiously
felt his way downward with a staff. Treading hastily behind him, and
stretching forth his gauntleted hand as if to grasp the old man's
shoulder, came a tall soldier-like figure equipped with a plumed cap
of steel, a bright breastplate and a long sword, which rattled against
the stairs. Next was seen a stout man dressed in rich and courtly
attire, but not of courtly demeanor; his gait had the swinging motion
of a seaman's walk, and, chancing to stumble on the staircase, he
suddenly grew wrathful and was heard to mutter an oath. He was
followed by a noble-looking personage in a curled wig such as are
represented in the portraits of Queen Anne's time and earlier, and the
breast of his coat was decorated with an embroidered star. While
advancing to the door he bowed to the right hand and to the left in a
very gracious and insinuating style, but as he crossed the threshold,
unlike the early Puritan governors, he seemed to wring his hands with
sorrow.

 "Prithee, play the part of a chorus, good Dr. Byles," said Sir William
Howe. "What worthies are these?"

 "If it please Your Excellency, they lived somewhat before my day,"
answered the doctor; "but doubtless our friend the colonel has been
hand and glove with them."

 "Their living faces I never looked upon," said Colonel Joliffe,
gravely; "although I have spoken face to face with many rulers of this
land, and shall greet yet another with an old man's blessing ere I
die. But we talk of these figures. I take the venerable patriarch to
be Bradstreet, the last of the Puritans, who was governor at ninety or
thereabouts. The next is Sir Edmund Andros, a tyrant, as any New
England schoolboy will tell you, and therefore the people cast him
down from his high seat into a dungeon. Then comes Sir William Phipps,
shepherd, cooper, sea-captain and governor. May many of his countrymen
rise as high from as low an origin! Lastly, you saw the gracious earl
of Bellamont, who ruled us under King William."

 "But what is the meaning of it all?" asked Lord Percy.

 "Now, were I a rebel," said Miss Joliffe, half aloud, "I might fancy
that the ghosts of these ancient governors had been summoned to form
the funeral procession of royal authority in New England."

 Several other figures were now seen at the turn of the staircase. The
one in advance had a thoughtful, anxious and somewhat crafty
expression of face, and in spite of his loftiness of manner, which was
evidently the result both of an ambitious spirit and of long
continuance in high stations, he seemed not incapable of cringing to a
greater than himself. A few steps behind came an officer in a scarlet
and embroidered uniform cut in a fashion old enough to have been worn
by the duke of Marlborough. His nose had a rubicund tinge, which,
together with the twinkle of his eye, might have marked him as a lover
of the wine-cup and good-fellowship; notwithstanding which tokens, he
appeared ill at ease, and often glanced around him as if apprehensive
of some secret mischief. Next came a portly gentleman wearing a coat
of shaggy cloth lined with silken velvet; he had sense, shrewdness and
humor in his face and a folio volume under his arm, but his aspect was
that of a man vexed and tormented beyond all patience and harassed
almost to death. He went hastily down, and was followed by a dignified
person dressed in a purple velvet suit with very rich embroidery; his
demeanor would have possessed much stateliness, only that a grievous
fit of the gout compelled him to hobble from stair to stair with
contortions of face and body. When Dr. Byles beheld this figure on the
staircase, he shivered as with an ague, but continued to watch him
steadfastly until the gouty gentleman had reached the threshold, made
a gesture of anguish and despair and vanished into the outer gloom,
whither the funeral music summoned him.

 "Governor Belcher—my old patron—in his very shape and dress!" gasped
Dr. Byles. "This is an awful mockery."

 "A tedious foolery, rather," said Sir William Howe, with an air of
indifference. "But who were the three that preceded him?"

 "Governor Dudley, a cunning politician; yet his craft once brought him
to a prison," replied Colonel Joliffe. "Governor Shute, formerly a
colonel under Marlborough, and whom the people frightened out of the
province, and learned Governor Burnett, whom the legislature tormented
into a mortal fever."

 "Methinks they were miserable men—these royal governors of
Massachusetts," observed Miss Joliffe. "Heavens! how dim the light
grows!"

 It was certainly a fact that the large lamp which illuminated the
staircase now burned dim and duskily; so that several figures which
passed hastily down the stairs and went forth from the porch appeared
rather like shadows than persons of fleshly substance.

 Sir William Howe and his guests stood at the doors of the contiguous
apartments watching the progress of this singular pageant with various
emotions of anger, contempt or half-acknowledged fear, but still with
an anxious curiosity. The shapes which now seemed hastening to join
the mysterious procession were recognized rather by striking
peculiarities of dress or broad characteristics of manner than by any
perceptible resemblance of features to their prototypes. Their faces,
indeed, were invariably kept in deep shadow, but Dr. Byles and other
gentlemen who had long been familiar with the successive rulers of the
province were heard to whisper the names of Shirley, of Pownall, of
Sir Francis Bernard and of the well-remembered Hutchinson, thereby
confessing that the actors, whoever they might be, in this spectral
march of governors had succeeded in putting on some distant
portraiture of the real personages. As they vanished from the door,
still did these shadows toss their arms into the gloom of night with a
dread expression of woe. Following the mimic representative of
Hutchinson came a military figure holding before his face the cocked
hat which he had taken from his powdered head, but his epaulettes and
other insignia of rank were those of a general officer, and something
in his mien reminded the beholders of one who had recently been master
of the province-house and chief of all the land.

 "The shape of Gage, as true as in a looking-glass!" exclaimed Lord
Percy, turning pale.

 "No, surely," cried Miss Joliffe, laughing hysterically; "it could not
be Gage, or Sir William would have greeted his old comrade in arms.
Perhaps he will not suffer the next to pass unchallenged."

 "Of that be assured, young lady," answered Sir William Howe, fixing
his eyes with a very marked expression upon the immovable visage of
her grandfather. "I have long enough delayed to pay the ceremonies of
a host to these departing guests; the next that takes his leave shall
receive due courtesy."

 A wild and dreary burst of music came through the open door. It seemed
as it the procession, which had been gradually filling up its ranks,
were now about to move, and that this loud peal of the wailing
trumpets and roll of the muffled drums were a call to some loiterer to
make haste. Many eyes, by an irresistible impulse, were turned upon
Sir William Howe, as if it were he whom the dreary music summoned to
the funeral of departed power.

 "See! here comes the last," whispered Miss Joliffe, pointing her
tremulous finger to the staircase.

 A figure had come into view as if descending the stairs, although so
dusky was the region whence it emerged some of the spectators fancied
that they had seen this human shape suddenly moulding itself amid the
gloom. Downward the figure came with a stately and martial tread, and,
reaching the lowest stair, was observed to be a tall man booted and
wrapped in a military cloak, which was drawn up around the face so as
to meet the napped brim of a laced hat; the features, therefore, were
completely hidden. But the British officers deemed that they had seen
that military cloak before, and even recognized the frayed embroidery
on the collar, as well as the gilded scabbard of a sword which
protruded from the folds of the cloak and glittered in a vivid gleam
of light. Apart from these trifling particulars there were
characteristics of gait and bearing which impelled the wondering
guests to glance from the shrouded figure to Sir William Howe, as if
to satisfy themselves that their host had not suddenly vanished from
the midst of them. With a dark flush of wrath upon his brow, they saw
the general draw his sword and advance to meet the figure in the cloak
before the latter had stepped one pace upon the floor.

 "Villain, unmuffle yourself!" cried he. "You pass no farther."

 The figure, without blenching a hair's-breadth from the sword which
was pointed at his breast, made a solemn pause and lowered the cape of
the cloak from about his face, yet not sufficiently for the spectators
to catch a glimpse of it. But Sir William Howe had evidently seen
enough. The sternness of his countenance gave place to a look of wild
amazement, if not horror, while he recoiled several steps from the
figure and let fall his sword upon the floor. The martial shape again
drew the cloak about his features and passed on, but, reaching the
threshold with his back toward the spectators, he was seen to stamp
his foot and shake his clenched hands in the air. It was afterward
affirmed that Sir William Howe had repeated that selfsame gesture of
rage and sorrow when for the last time, and as the last royal
governor, he passed through the portal of the province-house.

 "Hark! The procession moves," said Miss Joliffe.

 The music was dying away along the street, and its dismal strains were
mingled with the knell of midnight from the steeple of the Old South
and with the roar of artillery which announced that the beleaguered
army of Washington had intrenched itself upon a nearer height than
before. As the deep boom of the cannon smote upon his ear Colonel
Joliffe raised himself to the full height of his aged form and smiled
sternly on the British general.

 "Would Your Excellency inquire further into the mystery of the
pageant?" said he.

 "Take care of your gray head!" cried Sir William Howe, fiercely,
though with a quivering lip. "It has stood too long on a traitor's
shoulders."

 "You must make haste to chop it off, then," calmly replied the
colonel, "for a few hours longer, and not all the power of Sir William
Howe, nor of his master, shall cause one of these gray hairs to fall.
The empire of Britain in this ancient province is at its last gasp
to-night; almost while I speak it is a dead corpse, and methinks the
shadows of the old governors are fit mourners at its funeral."

 With these words Colonel Joliffe threw on his cloak, and, drawing his
granddaughter's arm within his own, retired from the last festival
that a British ruler ever held in the old province of Massachusetts
Bay. It was supposed that the colonel and the young lady possessed
some secret intelligence in regard to the mysterious pageant of that
night. However this might be, such knowledge has never become general.
The actors in the scene have vanished into deeper obscurity than even
that wild Indian hand who scattered the cargoes of the tea-ships on
the waves and gained a place in history, yet left no names. But
superstition, among other legends of this mansion, repeats the
wondrous tale that on the anniversary night of Britain's discomfiture
the ghosts of the ancient governors of Massachusetts still glide
through the portal of the Province House. And last of all comes a
figure shrouded in a military cloak, tossing his clenched hands into
the air and stamping his iron-shod boots upon the broad freestone
steps with a semblance of feverish despair, but without the sound of a
foot-tramp.

  When the truth-telling accents of the elderly gentleman were hushed, I
drew a long breath and looked round the room, striving with the best
energy of my imagination to throw a tinge of romance and historic
grandeur over the realities of the scene. But my nostrils snuffed up a
scent of cigar-smoke, clouds of which the narrator had emitted by way
of visible emblem, I suppose, of the nebulous obscurity of his tale.
Moreover, my gorgeous fantasies were woefully disturbed by the
rattling of the spoon in a tumbler of whiskey-punch which Mr. Thomas
Waite was mingling for a customer. Nor did it add to the picturesque
appearance of the panelled walls that the slate of the Brookline stage
was suspended against them, instead of the armorial escutcheon of some
far-descended governor. A stage-driver sat at one of the windows
reading a penny paper of the day—the Boston Times —and presenting a
figure which could nowise be brought into any picture of "Times in
Boston" seventy or a hundred years ago. On the window-seat lay a
bundle neatly done up in brown paper, the direction of which I had the
idle curiosity to read: "MISS SUSAN HUGGINS, at the PROVINCE HOUSE." A
pretty chambermaid, no doubt. In truth, it is desperately hard work
when we attempt to throw the spell of hoar antiquity over localities
with which the living world and the day that is passing over us have
aught to do. Yet, as I glanced at the stately staircase down which the
procession of the old governors had descended, and as I emerged
through the venerable portal whence their figures had preceded me, it
gladdened me to be conscious of a thrill of awe. Then, diving through
the narrow archway, a few strides transported me into the densest
throng of Washington street.

 

 

  II. 



EDWARD RANDOLPH'S PORTRAIT.

 The old legendary guest of the Province House abode in my remembrance
from midsummer till January. One idle evening last winter, confident
that he would be found in the snuggest corner of the bar-room, I
resolved to pay him another visit, hoping to deserve well of my
country by snatching from oblivion some else unheard-of fact of
history. The night was chill and raw, and rendered boisterous by
almost a gale of wind which whistled along Washington street, causing
the gaslights to flare and flicker within the lamps.

 As I hurried onward my fancy was busy with a comparison between the
present aspect of the street and that which it probably wore when the
British governors inhabited the mansion whither I was now going. Brick
edifices in those times were few till a succession of destructive
fires had swept, and swept again, the wooden dwellings and warehouses
from the most populous quarters of the town. The buildings stood
insulated and independent, not, as now, merging their separate
existences into connected ranges with a front of tiresome identity,
but each possessing features of its own, as if the owner's individual
taste had shaped it, and the whole presenting a picturesque
irregularity the absence of which is hardly compensated by any
beauties of our modern architecture. Such a scene, dimly vanishing
from the eye by the ray of here and there a tallow candle glimmering
through the small panes of scattered windows, would form a sombre
contrast to the street as I beheld it with the gaslights blazing from
corner to corner, flaming within the shops and throwing a noonday
brightness through the huge plates of glass. But the black, lowering
sky, as I turned my eyes upward, wore, doubtless, the same visage as
when it frowned upon the ante-Revolutionary New Englanders. The wintry
blast had the same shriek that was familiar to their ears. The Old
South Church, too, still pointed its antique spire into the darkness
and was lost between earth and heaven, and, as I passed, its clock,
which had warned so many generations how transitory was their
lifetime, spoke heavily and slow the same unregarded moral to myself.
"Only seven o'clock!" thought I. "My old friend's legends will
scarcely kill the hours 'twixt this and bedtime."

 Passing through the narrow arch, I crossed the courtyard, the confined
precincts of which were made visible by a lantern over the portal of
the Province House. On entering the bar-room, I found, as I expected,
the old tradition-monger seated by a special good fire of anthracite,
compelling clouds of smoke from a corpulent cigar. He recognized me
with evident pleasure, for my rare properties as a patient listener
invariably make me a favorite with elderly gentlemen and ladies of
narrative propensites. Drawing a chair to the fire, I desired mine
host to favor us with a glass apiece of whiskey-punch, which was
speedily prepared, steaming hot, with a slice of lemon at the bottom,
a dark-red stratum of port wine upon the surface and a sprinkling of
nutmeg strewn over all. As we touched our glasses together, my
legendary friend made himself known to me as Mr. Bela Tiffany, and I
rejoiced at the oddity of the name, because it gave his image and
character a sort of individuality in my conception. The old
gentleman's draught acted as a solvent upon his memory, so that it
overflowed with tales, traditions, anecdotes of famous dead people and
traits of ancient manners, some of which were childish as a nurse's
lullaby, while others might have been worth the notice of the grave
historian. Nothing impressed me more than a story of a black
mysterious picture which used to hang in one of the chambers of the
Province House, directly above the room where we were now sitting. The
following is as correct a version of the fact as the reader would be
likely to obtain from any other source, although, assuredly, it has a
tinge of romance approaching to the marvellous.

  In one of the apartments of the province-house there was long
preserved an ancient picture the frame of which was as black as ebony,
and the canvas itself so dark with age, damp and smoke that not a
touch of the painter's art could be discerned. Time had thrown an
impenetrable veil over it and left to tradition and fable and
conjecture to say what had once been there portrayed. During the rule
of many successive governors it had hung, by prescriptive and
undisputed right, over the mantel piece of the same chamber, and it
still kept its place when Lieutenant-governor Hutchinson assumed the
administration of the province on the departure of Sir Francis
Bernard.

 The lieutenant-governor sat one afternoon resting his head against the
carved back of his stately arm-chair and gazing up thoughtfully at the
void blackness of the picture. It was scarcely a time for such
inactive musing, when affairs of the deepest moment required the
ruler's decision; for within that very hour Hutchinson had received
intelligence of the arrival of a British fleet bringing three
regiments from Halifax to overawe the insubordination of the people.
These troops awaited his permission to occupy the fortress of Castle
William and the town itself, yet, instead of affixing his signature to
an official order, there sat the lieutenant-governor so carefully
scrutinizing the black waste of canvas that his demeanor attracted the
notice of two young persons who attended him. One, wearing a military
dress of buff, was his kinsman, Francis Lincoln, the provincial
captain of Castle William; the other, who sat on a low stool beside
his chair, was Alice Vane, his favorite niece. She was clad entirely
in white—a pale, ethereal creature who, though a native of New
England, had been educated abroad and seemed not merely a stranger
from another clime, but almost a being from another world. For several
years, until left an orphan, she had dwelt with her father in sunny
Italy, and there had acquired a taste and enthusiasm for sculpture and
painting which she found few opportunities of gratifying in the
undecorated dwellings of the colonial gentry. It was said that the
early productions of her own pencil exhibited no inferior genius,
though perhaps the rude atmosphere of New England had cramped her hand
and dimmed the glowing colors of her fancy. But, observing her uncle's
steadfast gaze, which appeared to search through the mist of years to
discover the subject of the picture, her curiosity was excited.

 "Is it known, my dear uncle," inquired she, "what this old picture
once represented? Possibly, could it be made visible, it might prove a
masterpiece of some great artist; else why has it so long held such a
conspicuous place?"

 As her uncle, contrary to his usual custom—for he was as attentive to
all the humors and caprices of Alice as if she had been his own
best-beloved child—did not immediately reply, the young captain of
Castle William took that office upon himself.

 "This dark old square of canvas, my fair cousin," said he, "has been
an heirloom in the province-house from time immemorial. As to the
painter, I can tell you nothing; but if half the stories told of it be
true, not one of the great Italian masters has ever produced so
marvellous a piece of work as that before you."

 Captain Lincoln proceeded to relate some of the strange fables and
fantasies which, as it was impossible to refute them by ocular
demonstration, had grown to be articles of popular belief in reference
to this old picture. One of the wildest, and at the same time the
best-accredited, accounts stated it to be an original and authentic
portrait of the evil one, taken at a witch-meeting near Salem, and
that its strong and terrible resemblance had been confirmed by several
of the confessing wizards and witches at their trial in open court. It
was likewise affirmed that a familiar spirit or demon abode behind the
blackness of the picture, and had shown himself at seasons of public
calamity to more than one of the royal governors. Shirley, for
instance, had beheld this ominous apparition on the eve of General
Abercrombie's shameful and bloody defeat under the walls of
Ticonderoga. Many of the servants of the province-house had caught
glimpses of a visage frowning down upon them at morning or evening
twilight, or in the depths of night while raking up the fire that
glimmered on the hearth beneath, although, if any were, bold enough to
hold a torch before the picture, it would appear as black and
undistinguishable as ever. The oldest inhabitant of Boston recollected
that his father—in whose days the portrait had not wholly faded out
of sight—had once looked upon it, but would never suffer himself to
be questioned as to the face which was there represented. In
connection with such stories, it was remarkable that over the top of
the frame there were some ragged remnants of black silk, indicating
that a veil had formerly hung down before the picture until the
duskiness of time had so effectually concealed it. But, after all, it
was the most singular part of the affair that so many of the pompous
governors of Massachusetts had allowed the obliterated picture to
remain in the state-chamber of the province-house.

 "Some of these fables are really awful," observed Alice Vane, who had
occasionally shuddered as well as smiled while her cousin spoke. "It
would be almost worth while to wipe away the black surface of the
canvas, since the original picture can hardly be so formidable as
those which fancy paints instead of it."

 "But would it be possible," inquired her cousin," to restore this dark
picture to its pristine hues?"

 "Such arts are known in Italy," said Alice.

 The lieutenant-governor had roused himself from his abstracted mood,
and listened with a smile to the conversation of his young relatives.
Yet his voice had something peculiar in its tones when he undertook
the explanation of the mystery.

 "I am sorry, Alice, to destroy your faith in the legends of which you
are so fond," remarked he, "but my antiquarian researches have long
since made me acquainted with the subject of this picture—if picture
it can be called—which is no more visible, nor ever will be, than the
face of the long-buried man whom it once represented. It was the
portrait of Edward Randolph, the founder of this house, a person
famous in the history of New England."

 "Of that Edward Randolph," exclaimed Captain Lincoln, "who obtained the
repeal of the first provincial charter, under which our forefathers
had enjoyed almost democratic privileges—he that was styled the
arch-enemy of New England, and whose memory is still held in detestation
as the destroyer of our liberties?"

 "It was the same Randolph," answered Hutchinson, moving uneasily in
his chair. "It was his lot to taste the bitterness of popular odium."

 "Our annals tell us," continued the captain of Castle William, "that
the curse of the people followed this Randolph where he went and
wrought evil in all the subsequent events of his life, and that its
effect was seen, likewise, in the manner of his death. They say, too,
that the inward misery of that curse worked itself outward and was
visible on the wretched man's countenance, making it too horrible to
be looked upon. If so, and if this picture truly represented his
aspect, it was in mercy that the cloud of blackness has gathered over
it."

 "These traditions are folly to one who has proved, as I have, how little
of historic truth lies at the bottom," said the lieutenant-governor.
"As regards the life and character of Edward Randolph, too implicit
credence has been given to Dr. Cotton Mather, who—I must say it,
though some of his blood runs in my veins—has filled our early
history with old women's tales as fanciful and extravagant as those of
Greece or Rome."

 "And yet," whispered Alice Vane, "may not such fables have a moral?
And methinks, if the visage of this portrait be so dreadful, it is not
without a cause that it has hung so long in a chamber of the
province-house. When the rulers feel themselves irresponsible, it were
well that they should be reminded of the awful weight of a people's
curse."

 The lieutenant-governor started and gazed for a moment at his niece,
as if her girlish fantasies had struck upon some feeling in his own
breast which all his policy or principles could not entirely subdue.
He knew, indeed, that Alice, in spite of her foreign education,
retained the native sympathies of a New England girl.

 "Peace, silly child!" cried he, at last, more harshly than he had ever
before addressed the gentle Alice. "The rebuke of a king; is more to
be dreaded than the clamor of a wild, misguided multitude.—Captain
Lincoln, it is decided: the fortress of Castle William must be
occupied by the royal troops. The two remaining regiments shall be
billeted in the town or encamped upon the Common. It is time, after
years of tumult, and almost rebellion, that His Majesty's government
should have a wall of strength about it."

 "Trust, sir—trust yet a while to the loyalty of the people," said
Captain Lincoln, "nor teach them that they can ever be on other terms
with British soldiers than those of brotherhood, as when they fought
side by side through the French war. Do not convert the streets of
your native town into a camp. Think twice before you give up old
Castle William, the key of the province, into other keeping than that
of true-born New Englanders."

 "Young man, it is decided," repeated Hutchinson, rising from his
chair. "A British officer will be in attendance this evening to
receive the necessary instructions for the disposal of the troops.
Your presence also will be required. Till then, farewell."

 With these words the lieutenant-governor hastily left the room, while
Alice and her cousin more slowly followed, whispering together, and
once pausing to glance back at the mysterious picture. The captain of
Castle William fancied that the girl's air and mien were such as might
have belonged to one of those spirits of fable—fairies or creatures
of a more antique mythology—who sometimes mingled their agency with
mortal affairs, half in caprice, yet with a sensibility to human weal
or woe. As he held the door for her to pass Alice beckoned to the
picture and smiled.

 "Come forth, dark and evil shape!" cried she. "It is thine hour."

 In the evening Lieutenant-governor Hutchinson sat in the same chamber
where the foregoing scene had occurred, surrounded by several persons
whose various interests had summoned them together. There were the
selectmen of Boston—plain patriarchal fathers of the people,
excellent representatives of the old puritanical founders whose sombre
strength had stamped so deep an impress upon the New England
character. Contrasting with these were one or two members of council,
richly dressed in the white wigs, the embroidered waistcoats and other
magnificence of the time, and making a somewhat ostentatious display
of courtier-like ceremonial. In attendance, likewise, was a major of
the British army, awaiting the lieutenant-governor's orders for the
landing of the troops, which still remained on board the transports.
The captain of Castle William stood beside Hutchinson's chair, with
folded arms, glancing rather haughtily at the British officer by whom
he was soon to be superseded in his command. On a table in the centre
of the chamber stood a branched silver candlestick, throwing down the
glow of half a dozen waxlights upon a paper apparently ready for the
lieutenant-governor's signature.

 Partly shrouded in the voluminous folds of one of the window-curtains,
which fell from the ceiling to the floor, was seen the white drapery
of a lady's robe. It may appear strange that Alice Vane should have
been there at such a time, but there was something so childlike, so
wayward, in her singular character, so apart from ordinary rules, that
her presence did not surprise the few who noticed it. Meantime, the
chairman of the selectmen was addressing to the lieutenant-governor a
long and solemn protest against the reception of the British troops
into the town.

 "And if Your Honor," concluded this excellent but somewhat prosy old
gentleman, "shall see fit to persist in bringing these mercenary
sworders and musketeers into our quiet streets, not on our heads be
the responsibility. Think, sir, while there is yet time, that if one
drop of blood be shed, that blood shall be an eternal stain upon Your
Honor's memory. You, sir, have written with an able pen the deeds of
our forefathers; the more to be desired is it, therefore, that
yourself should deserve honorable mention as a true patriot and
upright ruler when your own doings shall be written down in history."

 "I am not insensible, my good sir, to the natural desire to stand well
in the annals of my country," replied Hutchinson, controlling his
impatience into courtesy, "nor know I any better method of attaining
that end than by withstanding the merely temporary spirit of mischief
which, with your pardon, seems to have infected older men than myself.
Would you have me wait till the mob shall sack the province-house as
they did my private mansion? Trust me, sir, the time may come when you
will be glad to flee for protection to the king's banner, the raising
of which is now so distasteful to you."

 "Yes," said the British major, who was impatiently expecting the
lieutenant-governor's orders. "The demagogues of this province have
raised the devil, and cannot lay him again. We will exorcise him in
God's name and the king's."

 "If you meddle with the devil, take care of his claws," answered the
captain of Castle William, stirred by the taunt against his
countrymen.

 "Craving your pardon, young sir," said the venerable selectman, "let
not an evil spirit enter into your words. We will strive against the
oppressor with prayer and fasting, as our forefathers would have done.
Like them, moreover, we will submit to whatever lot a wise Providence
may send us—always after our own best exertions to amend it."

 "And there peep forth the devil's claws!" muttered Hutchinson, who
well understood the nature of Puritan submission. "This matter shall
be expedited forthwith. When there shall be a sentinel at every corner
and a court of guard before the town-house, a loyal gentleman may
venture to walk abroad. What to me is the outcry of a mob in this
remote province of the realm? The king is my master, and England is my
country; upheld by their armed strength, I set my foot upon the rabble
and defy them."

 He snatched a pen and was about to affix his signature to the paper
that lay on the table, when the captain of Castle William placed his
hand upon his shoulder. The freedom of the action, so contrary to the
ceremonious respect which was then considered due to rank and dignity,
awakened general surprise, and in none more than in the
lieutenant-governor himself. Looking angrily up, he perceived that his
young relative was pointing his finger to the opposite wall.
Hutchinson's eye followed the signal, and he saw what had hitherto
been unobserved—that a black silk curtain was suspended before the
mysterious picture, so as completely to conceal it. His thoughts
immediately recurred to the scene of the preceding afternoon, and in
his surprise, confused by indistinct emotions, yet sensible that his
niece must have had an agency in this phenomenon, he called loudly
upon her:

 "Alice! Come hither, Alice!"

 No sooner had he spoken than Alice Vane glided from her station, and,
pressing one hand across her eyes, with the other snatched away the
sable curtain that concealed the portrait. An exclamation of surprise
burst from every beholder, but the lieutenant-governor's voice had a
tone of horror.

 "By Heaven!" said he, in a low inward murmur, speaking rather to
himself than to those around him; "if the spirit of Edward Randolph
were to appear among us from the place of torment, he could not wear
more of the terrors of hell upon his face."

 "For some wise end," said the aged selectman, solemnly, "hath
Providence scattered away the mist of years that had so long hid this
dreadful effigy. Until this hour no living man hath seen what we
behold."

 Within the antique frame which so recently had enclosed a sable waste
of canvas now appeared a visible picture-still dark, indeed, in its
hues and shadings, but thrown forward in strong relief. It was a
half-length figure of a gentleman in a rich but very old-fashioned
dress of embroidered velvet, with a broad ruff and a beard, and
wearing a hat the brim of which overshadowed his forehead. Beneath
this cloud the eyes had a peculiar glare which was almost lifelike.
The whole portrait started so distinctly out of the background that it
had the effect of a person looking down from the wall at the
astonished and awe-stricken spectators. The expression of the face, if
any words can convey an idea of it, was that of a wretch detected in
some hideous guilt and exposed to the bitter hatred and laughter and
withering scorn of a vast surrounding multitude. There was the
struggle of defiance, beaten down and overwhelmed by the crushing
weight of ignominy. The torture of the soul had come forth upon the
countenance. It seemed as if the picture, while hidden behind the
cloud of immemorial years, had been all the time acquiring an intenser
depth and darkness of expression, till now it gloomed forth again and
threw its evil omen over the present hour. Such, if the wild legend
may be credited, was the portrait of Edward Randolph as he appeared
when a people's curse had wrought its influence upon his nature.

 "'Twould drive me mad, that awful face," said Hutchinson, who seemed
fascinated by the contemplation of it.

 "Be warned, then," whispered Alice. "He trampled on a people's rights.
Behold his punishment, and avoid a crime like his."

 The lieutenant-governor actually trembled for an instant, but,
exerting his energy—which was not, however, his most characteristic
feature—he strove to shake off the spell of Randolph's countenance.

 "Girl," cried he, laughing bitterly, as he turned to Alice, "have you
brought hither your painter's art, your Italian spirit of intrigue,
your tricks of stage-effect, and think to influence the councils of
rulers and the affairs of nations by such shallow contrivances? See
here!"

 "Stay yet a while," said the selectman as Hutchinson again snatched
the pen; "for if ever mortal man received a warning from a tormented
soul, Your Honor is that man."

 "Away!" answered Hutchinson, fiercely. "Though yonder senseless
picture cried 'Forbear!' it should not move me!"

 Casting a scowl of defiance at the pictured face—which seemed at that
moment to intensify the horror of its miserable and wicked look—he
scrawled on the paper, in characters that betokened it a deed of
desperation, the name of Thomas Hutchinson. Then, it is said, he
shuddered, as if that signature had granted away his salvation.

 "It is done," said he, and placed his hand upon his brow.

 "May Heaven forgive the deed!" said the soft, sad accents of Alice
Vane, like the voice of a good spirit flitting away.

 When morning came, there was a stifled whisper through the household, and
spreading thence about the town, that the dark mysterious picture had
started from the wall and spoken face to face with Lieutenant-governor
Hutchinson. If such a miracle had been wrought, however, no traces of
it remained behind; for within the antique frame nothing could be
discerned save the impenetrable cloud which had covered the canvas
since the memory of man. If the figure had, indeed, stepped forth, it
had fled back, spirit-like, at the day-dawn, and hidden itself behind
a century's obscurity. The truth probably was that Alice Vane's secret
for restoring the hues of the picture had merely effected a temporary
renovation. But those who in that brief interval had beheld the awful
visage of Edward Randolph desired no second glance, and ever afterward
trembled at the recollection of the scene, as if an evil spirit had
appeared visibly among them. And, as for Hutchinson, when, far over
the ocean, his dying-hour drew on, he gasped for breath and complained
that he was choking with the blood of the Boston Massacre, and Francis
Lincoln, the former captain of Castle William, who was standing at his
bedside, perceived a likeness in his frenzied look to that of Edward
Randolph. Did his broken spirit feel at that dread hour the tremendous
burden of a people's curse?

  At the conclusion of this miraculous legend I inquired of mine host
whether the picture still remained in the chamber over our heads, but
Mr. Tiffany informed me that it had long since been removed, and was
supposed to be hidden in some out-of-the-way corner of the New England
Museum. Perchance some curious antiquary may light upon it there, and,
with the assistance of Mr. Howorth, the picture-cleaner, may supply a
not unnecessary proof of the authenticity of the facts here set down.

 During the progress of the story a storm had been gathering abroad and
raging and rattling so loudly in the upper regions of the Province
House that it seemed as if all the old governors and great men were
running riot above stairs while Mr. Bela Tiffany babbled of them
below. In the course of generations, when many people have lived and
died in an ancient house, the whistling of the wind through its
crannies and the creaking of its beams and rafters become strangely
like the tones of the human voice, or thundering laughter, or heavy
footsteps treading the deserted chambers. It is as if the echoes of
half a century were revived. Such were the ghostly sounds that roared
and murmured in our ears when I took leave of the circle round the
fireside of the Province House and, plunging down the doorsteps,
fought my way homeward against a drifting snow-storm.

 

 

  III. 



LADY ELEANORE'S MANTLE.

 Mine excellent friend the landlord of the Province House was pleased
the other evening to invite Mr. Tiffany and myself to an
oyster-supper. This slight mark of respect and gratitude, as he
handsomely observed, was far less than the ingenious tale-teller, and
I, the humble note-taker of his narratives, had fairly earned by the
public notice which our joint lucubrations had attracted to his
establishment. Many a cigar had been smoked within his premises, many
a glass of wine or more potent aqua vitæ had been quaffed, many
a dinner had been eaten, by curious strangers who, save for the
fortunate conjunction of Mr. Tiffany and me, would never have ventured
through that darksome avenue which gives access to the historic
precincts of the Province House. In short, if any credit be due to the
courteous assurances of Mr. Thomas Waite, we had brought his forgotten
mansion almost as effectually into public view as if we had thrown
down the vulgar range of shoe-shops and dry-good stores which hides
its aristocratic front from Washington street. It may be unadvisable,
however, to speak too loudly of the increased custom of the house,
lest Mr. Waite should find it difficult to renew the lease on so
favorable terms as heretofore.

 Being thus welcomed as benefactors, neither Mr. Tiffany nor myself
felt any scruple in doing full justice to the good things that were
set before us. If the feast were less magnificent than those same
panelled walls had witnessed in a bygone century; if mine host
presided with somewhat less of state than might have befitted a
successor of the royal governors; if the guests made a less imposing
show than the bewigged and powdered and embroidered dignitaries who
erst banqueted at the gubernatorial table and now sleep within their
armorial tombs on Copp's Hill or round King's Chapel,—yet never, I
may boldly say, did a more comfortable little party assemble in the
province-house from Queen Anne's days to the Revolution. The occasion
was rendered more interesting by the presence of a venerable personage
whose own actual reminiscences went back to the epoch of Gage and
Howe, and even supplied him with a doubtful anecdote or two of
Hutchinson. He was one of that small, and now all but extinguished,
class whose attachment to royalty, and to the colonial institutions
and customs that were connected with it, had never yielded to the
democratic heresies of after-times. The young queen of Britain has not
a more loyal subject in her realm—perhaps not one who would kneel
before her throne with such reverential love—as this old grandsire
whose head has whitened beneath the mild sway of the republic which
still in his mellower moments he terms a usurpation. Yet prejudices so
obstinate have not made him an ungentle or impracticable companion. If
the truth must be told, the life of the aged loyalist has been of such
a scrambling and unsettled character—he has had so little choice of
friends and been so often destitute of any—that I doubt whether he
would refuse a cup of kindness with either Oliver Cromwell or John
Hancock, to say nothing of any democrat now upon the stage. In another
paper of this series I may perhaps give the reader a closer glimpse of
his portrait.

 Our host in due season uncorked a bottle of Madeira of such exquisite
perfume and admirable flavor that he surely must have discovered it in
an ancient bin down deep beneath the deepest cellar where some jolly
old butler stored away the governor's choicest wine and forgot to
reveal the secret on his death-bed. Peace to his red-nosed ghost and a
libation to his memory! This precious liquor was imbibed by Mr.
Tiffany with peculiar zest, and after sipping the third glass it was
his pleasure to give us one of the oddest legends which he had yet
raked from the storehouse where he keeps such matters. With some
suitable adornments from my own fancy, it ran pretty much as follows.

  Not long after Colonel Shute had assumed the government of
Massachusetts Bay—now nearly a hundred and twenty years ago—a young
lady of rank and fortune arrived from England to claim his protection
as her guardian. He was her distant relative, but the nearest who had
survived the gradual extinction of her family; so that no more
eligible shelter could be found for the rich and high-born Lady
Eleanore Rochcliffe than within the province-house of a Transatlantic
colony. The consort of Governor Shute, moreover, had been as a mother
to her childhood, and was now anxious to receive her in the hope that
a beautiful young woman would be exposed to infinitely less peril from
the primitive society of New England than amid the artifices and
corruptions of a court. If either the governor or his lady had
especially consulted their own comfort, they would probably have
sought to devolve the responsibility on other hands, since with some
noble and splendid traits of character Lady Eleanore was remarkable
for a harsh, unyielding pride, a haughty consciousness of her
hereditary and personal advantages, which made her almost incapable of
control. Judging from many traditionary anecdotes, this peculiar
temper was hardly less than a monomania; or if the acts which it
inspired were those of a sane person, it seemed due from Providence
that pride so sinful should be followed by as severe a retribution.
That tinge of the marvellous which is thrown over so many of these
half-forgotten legends has probably imparted an additional wildness to
the strange story of Lady Eleanore Rochcliffe.

 The ship in which she came passenger had arrived at Newport, whence
Lady Eleanore was conveyed to Boston in the governor's coach, attended
by a small escort of gentlemen on horseback. The ponderous equipage,
with its four black horses, attracted much notice as it rumbled
through Cornhill surrounded by the prancing steeds of half a dozen
cavaliers with swords dangling to their stirrups and pistols at their
holsters. Through the large glass windows of the coach, as it rolled
along, the people could discern the figure of Lady Eleanore, strangely
combining an almost queenly stateliness with the grace and beauty of a
maiden in her teens. A singular tale had gone abroad among the ladies
of the province that their fair rival was indebted for much of the
irresistible charm of her appearance to a certain article of dress—an
embroidered mantle—which had been wrought by the most skilful artist
in London, and possessed even magical properties of adornment. On the
present occasion, however, she owed nothing to the witchery of dress,
being clad in a riding-habit of velvet which would have appeared stiff
and ungraceful on any other form.

 The coachman reined in his four black steeds, and the whole cavalcade
came to a pause in front of the contorted iron balustrade that fenced
the province-house from the public street. It was an awkward
coincidence that the bell of the Old South was just then tolling for a
funeral; so that, instead of a gladsome peal with which it was
customary to announce the arrival of distinguished strangers, Lady
Eleanore Rochcliffe was ushered by a doleful clang, as if calamity had
come embodied in her beautiful person.

 "A very great disrespect!" exclaimed Captain Langford, an English
officer who had recently brought despatches to Governor Shute. "The
funeral should have been deferred lest Lady Eleanore's spirits be
affected by such a dismal welcome."

 "With your pardon, sir," replied Dr. Clarke, a physician and a famous
champion of the popular party, "whatever the heralds may pretend, a
dead beggar must have precedence of a living queen. King Death confers
high privileges."

 These remarks-were interchanged while the speakers waited a passage
through the crowd which had gathered on each side of the gateway,
leaving an open avenue to the portal of the province-house. A black
slave in livery now leaped from behind the coach and threw open the
door, while at the same moment Governor Shute descended the flight of
steps from his mansion to assist Lady Eleanore in alighting. But the
governor's stately approach was anticipated in a manner that excited
general astonishment. A pale young man with his black hair all in
disorder rushed from the throng and prostrated himself beside the
coach, thus offering his person as a footstool for Lady Eleanore
Rochcliffe to tread upon. She held back an instant, yet with an
expression as if doubting whether the young man were worthy to bear
the weight of her footstep rather than dissatisfied to receive such
awful reverence from a fellow-mortal.

 "Up, sir!" said the governor, sternly, at the same time lifting his
cane over the intruder. "What means the Bedlamite by this freak?"

 "Nay," answered Lady Eleanore, playfully, but with more scorn than
pity in her tone; "Your Excellency shall not strike him. When men seek
only to be trampled upon, it were a pity to deny them a favor so
easily granted—and so well deserved!" Then, though as lightly as a
sunbeam on a cloud, she placed her foot upon the cowering form and
extended her hand to meet that of the governor.

 There was a brief interval during which Lady Eleanore retained this
attitude, and never, surely, was there an apter emblem of aristocracy
and hereditary pride trampling on human sympathies and the kindred of
nature than these two figures presented at that moment. Yet the
spectators were so smitten with her beauty, and so essential did pride
seem to the existence of such a creature, that they gave a
simultaneous acclamation of applause.

 "Who is this insolent young fellow?" inquired Captain Langford, who
still remained beside Dr. Clarke. "If he be in his senses, his
impertinence demands the bastinado; if mad, Lady Eleanore should be
secured from further inconvenience by his confinement."

 "His name is Jervase Helwyse," answered the doctor—"a youth of no
birth or fortune, or other advantages save the mind and soul that
nature gave him; and, being secretary to our colonial agent in London,
it was his misfortune to meet this Lady Eleanore Rochcliffe. He loved
her, and her scorn has driven him mad."

 "He was mad so to aspire," observed the English officer.

 "It may be so," said Dr. Clarke, frowning as he spoke; "but I tell
you, sir, I could wellnigh doubt the justice of the Heaven above us if
no signal humiliation overtake this lady who now treads so haughtily
into yonder mansion. She seeks to place herself above the sympathies
of our common nature, which envelops all human souls; see if that
nature do not assert its claim over her in some mode that shall bring
her level with the lowest."

 "Never!" cried Captain Langford, indignantly—"neither in life nor
when they lay her with her ancestors."

 Not many days afterward the governor gave a ball in honor of Lady
Eleanore Rochcliffe. The principal gentry of the colony received
invitations, which were distributed to their residences far and near
by messengers on horseback bearing missives sealed with all the
formality of official despatches. In obedience to the summons, there
was a general gathering of rank, wealth and beauty, and the wide door
of the province-house had seldom given admittance to more numerous and
honorable guests than on the evening of Lady Eleanore's ball. Without
much extravagance of eulogy, the spectacle might even be termed
splendid, for, according to the fashion of the times, the ladies shone
in rich silks and satins outspread over wide-projecting hoops, and the
gentlemen glittered in gold embroidery laid unsparingly upon the
purple or scarlet or sky-blue velvet which was the material of their
coats and waistcoats. The latter article of dress was of great
importance, since it enveloped the wearer's body nearly to the knees
and was perhaps bedizened with the amount of his whole year's income
in golden flowers and foliage. The altered taste of the present day—a
taste symbolic of a deep change in the whole system of society—would
look upon almost any of those gorgeous figures as ridiculous, although
that evening the guests sought their reflections in the pier-glasses
and rejoiced to catch their own glitter amid the glittering crowd.
What a pity that one of the stately mirrors has not preserved a
picture of the scene which by the very traits that were so transitory
might have taught us much that would be worth knowing and remembering!

 Would, at least, that either painter or mirror could convey to us some
faint idea of a garment already noticed in this legend—the Lady
Eleanore's embroidered mantle, which the gossips whispered was
invested with magic properties, so as to lend a new and untried grace
to her figure each time that she put it on! Idle fancy as it is, this
mysterious mantle has thrown an awe around my image of her, partly
from its fabled virtues and partly because it was the handiwork of a
dying woman, and perchance owed the fantastic grace of its conception
to the delirium of approaching death.

 After the ceremonial greetings had been paid, Lady Eleanore Rochcliffe
stood apart from the mob of guests, insulating herself within a small
and distinguished circle to whom she accorded a more cordial favor
than to the general throng. The waxen torches threw their radiance
vividly over the scene, bringing out its brilliant points in strong
relief, but she gazed carelessly, and with now and then an expression
of weariness or scorn tempered with such feminine grace that her
auditors scarcely perceived the moral deformity of which it was the
utterance. She beheld the spectacle not with vulgar ridicule, as
disdaining to be pleased with the provincial mockery of a
court-festival, but with the deeper scorn of one whose spirit held
itself too high to participate in the enjoyment of other human souls.
Whether or no the recollections of those who saw her that evening were
influenced by the strange events with which she was subsequently
connected, so it was that her figure ever after recurred to them as
marked by something wild and unnatural, although at the time the
general whisper was of her exceeding beauty and of the indescribable
charm which her mantle threw around her. Some close observers, indeed,
detected a feverish flush and alternate paleness of countenance, with
a corresponding flow and revulsion of spirits, and once or twice a
painful and helpless betrayal of lassitude, as if she were on the
point of sinking to the ground. Then, with a nervous shudder, she
seemed to arouse her energies, and threw some bright and playful yet
half-wicked sarcasm into the conversation. There was so strange a
characteristic in her manners and sentiments that it astonished every
right-minded listener, till, looking in her face, a lurking and
incomprehensible glance and smile perplexed them with doubts both as
to her seriousness and sanity. Gradually, Lady Eleanore Rochcliffe's
circle grew smaller, till only four gentlemen remained in it. These
were Captain Langford, the English officer before mentioned; a
Virginian planter who had come to Massachusetts on some political
errand; a young Episcopal clergyman, the grandson of a British earl;
and, lastly, the private secretary of Governor Shute, whose
obsequiousness had won a sort of tolerance from Lady Eleanore.

 At different periods of the evening the liveried servants of the
province-house passed among the guests bearing huge trays of
refreshments and French and Spanish wines. Lady Eleanore Rochcliffe,
who refused to wet her beautiful lips even with a bubble of champagne,
had sunk back into a large damask chair, apparently overwearied either
with the excitement of the scene or its tedium; and while, for an
instant, she was unconscious of voices, laughter and music, a young
man stole forward and knelt down at her feet. He bore a salver in his
hand on which was a chased silver goblet filled to the brim with wine,
which he offered as reverentially as to a crowned queen—or, rather,
with the awful devotion of a priest doing sacrifice to his idol.
Conscious that some one touched her robe, Lady Eleanore started, and
unclosed her eyes upon the pale, wild features and dishevelled hair of
Jervase Helwyse.

 "Why do you haunt me thus?" said she, in a languid tone, but with a
kindlier feeling than she ordinarily permitted herself to express.
"They tell me that I have done you harm."

 "Heaven knows if that be so," replied the young man, solemnly. "But,
Lady Eleanore, in requital of that harm, if such there be, and for
your own earthly and heavenly welfare, I pray you to take one sip of
this holy wine and then to pass the goblet round among the guests. And
this shall be a symbol that you have not sought to withdraw yourself
from the chain of human sympathies, which whoso would shake off must
keep company with fallen angels."

 "Where has this mad fellow stolen that sacramental vessel?" exclaimed
the Episcopal clergyman.

 This question drew the notice of the guests to the silver cup, which
was recognized as appertaining to the communion-plate of the Old South
Church, and, for aught that could be known, it was brimming over with
the consecrated wine.

 "Perhaps it is poisoned," half whispered the governor's secretary.

 "Pour it down the villain's throat!" cried the Virginian, fiercely.

 "Turn him out of the house!" cried Captain Langford, seizing Jervase
Helwyse so roughly by the shoulder that the sacramental cup was
overturned and its contents sprinkled upon Lady Eleanore's mantle.
"Whether knave, fool or Bedlamite, it is intolerable that the fellow
should go at large."

 "Pray, gentlemen, do my poor admirer no harm," said Lady Eleanore,
with a faint and weary smile. "Take him out of my sight, if such be
your pleasure, for I can find in my heart to do nothing but laugh at
him, whereas, in all decency and conscience, it would become me to
weep for the mischief I have wrought."

 But while the bystanders were attempting to lead away the unfortunate
young man he broke from them and with a wild, impassioned earnestness
offered a new and equally strange petition to Lady Eleanore. It was no
other than that she should throw off the mantle, which while he
pressed the silver cup of wine upon her she had drawn more closely
around her form, so as almost to shroud herself within it.

 "Cast it from you," exclaimed Jervase Helwyse, clasping his hands in
an agony of entreaty. "It may not yet be too late. Give the accursed
garment to the flames."

 But Lady Eleanore, with a laugh of scorn, drew the rich folds of the
embroidered mantle over her head in such a fashion as to give a
completely new aspect to her beautiful face, which, half hidden, half
revealed, seemed to belong to some being of mysterious character and
purposes.

 "Farewell, Jervase Helwyse!" said she. "Keep my image in your
remembrance as you behold it now."

 "Alas, lady!" he replied, in a tone no longer wild, but sad as a
funeral-bell; "we must meet shortly when your face may wear another
aspect, and that shall be the image that must abide within me." He
made no more resistance to the violent efforts of the gentlemen and
servants who almost dragged him out of the apartment and dismissed him
roughly from the iron gate of the province-house.

 Captain Langford, who had been very active in this affair, was
returning to the presence of Lady Eleanore Rochcliffe, when he
encountered the physician, Dr. Clarke, with whom he had held some
casual talk on the day of her arrival. The doctor stood apart,
separated from Lady Eleanore by the width of the room, but eying her
with such keen sagacity that Captain Langford involuntarily gave him
credit for the discovery of some deep secret.

 "You appear to be smitten, after all, with the charms of this queenly
maiden," said he, hoping thus to draw forth the physician's hidden
knowledge.

 "God forbid!" answered Dr. Clarke, with a grave smile; "and if you be
wise, you will put up the same prayer for yourself. Woe to those who
shall be smitten by this beautiful Lady Eleanore! But yonder stands
the governor, and I have a word or two for his private ear.
Good-night!" He accordingly advanced to Governor Shute and addressed
him in so low a tone that none of the bystanders could catch a word of
what he said, although the sudden change of His Excellency's hitherto
cheerful visage betokened that the communication could be of no
agreeable import. A very few moments afterward it was announced to the
guests that an unforeseen circumstance rendered it necessary to put a
premature close to the festival.

 The ball at the province-house supplied a topic of conversation for
the colonial metropolis for some days after its occurrence, and might
still longer have been the general theme, only that a subject of
all-engrossing interest thrust it for a time from the public
recollection. This was the appearance of a dreadful epidemic which in
that age, and long before and afterward, was wont to slay its hundreds
and thousands on both sides of the Atlantic. On the occasion of which
we speak it was distinguished by a peculiar virulence, insomuch that
it has left its traces—its pitmarks, to use an appropriate figure—on
the history of the country, the affairs of which were thrown into
confusion by its ravages. At first, unlike its ordinary course, the
disease seemed to confine itself to the higher circles of society,
selecting its victims from among the proud, the well-born and the
wealthy, entering unabashed into stately chambers and lying down with
the slumberers in silken beds. Some of the most distinguished guests
of the province-house—even those whom the haughty Lady Eleanore
Rochcliffe had deemed not unworthy of her favor—were stricken by this
fatal scourge. It was noticed with an ungenerous bitterness of feeling
that the four gentlemen—the Virginian, the British officer, the young
clergyman and the governor's secretary—who had been her most devoted
attendants on the evening of the ball were the foremost on whom the
plague-stroke fell. But the disease, pursuing its onward progress,
soon ceased to be exclusively a prerogative of aristocracy. Its red
brand was no longer conferred like a noble's star or an order of
knighthood. It threaded its way through the narrow and crooked
streets, and entered the low, mean, darksome dwellings and laid its
hand of death upon the artisans and laboring classes of the town. It
compelled rich and poor to feel themselves brethren then, and stalking
to and fro across the Three Hills with a fierceness which made it
almost a new pestilence, there was that mighty conqueror—that scourge
and horror of our forefathers—the small-pox.

 We cannot estimate the affright which this plague inspired of yore by
contemplating it as the fangless monster of the present day. We must
remember, rather, with what awe we watched the gigantic footsteps of
the Asiatic cholera striding from shore to shore of the Atlantic and
marching like Destiny upon cities far remote which flight had already
half depopulated. There is no other fear so horrible and unhumanizing
as that which makes man dread to breathe heaven's vital air lest it be
poison, or to grasp the hand of a brother or friend lest the grip of
the pestilence should clutch him. Such was the dismay that now
followed in the track of the disease or ran before it throughout the
town. Graves were hastily dug and the pestilential relics as hastily
covered, because the dead were enemies of the living and strove to
draw them headlong, as it were, into their own dismal pit. The public
councils were suspended, as if mortal wisdom might relinquish its
devices now that an unearthly usurper had found his way into the
ruler's mansion. Had an enemy's fleet been hovering on the coast or
his armies trampling on our soil, the people would probably have
committed their defence to that same direful conqueror who had wrought
their own calamity and would permit no interference with his sway.
This conqueror had a symbol of his triumphs: it was a blood-red flag
that fluttered in the tainted air over the door of every dwelling into
which the small-pox had entered.

 Such a banner was long since waving over the portal of the
province-house, for thence, as was proved by tracking its footsteps
back, had all this dreadful mischief issued. It had been traced back
to a lady's luxurious chamber, to the proudest of the proud, to her
that was so delicate and hardly owned herself of earthly mould, to the
haughty one who took her stand above human sympathies—to Lady
Eleanore. There remained no room for doubt that the contagion had
lurked in that gorgeous mantle which threw so strange a grace around
her at the festival. Its fantastic splendor had been conceived in the
delirious brain of a woman on her death-bed and was the last toil of
her stiffening fingers, which had interwoven fate and misery with its
golden threads. This dark tale, whispered at first, was now bruited
far and wide. The people raved against the Lady Eleanore and cried out
that her pride and scorn had evoked a fiend, and that between them
both this monstrous evil had been born. At times their rage and
despair took the semblance of grinning mirth; and whenever the red
flag of the pestilence was hoisted over another and yet another door,
they clapped their hands and shouted through the streets in bitter
mockery: "Behold a new triumph for the Lady Eleanore!"

 One day in the midst of these dismal times a wild figure approached
the portal of the province-house, and, folding his arms, stood
contemplating the scarlet banner, which a passing breeze shook
fitfully, as if to fling abroad the contagion that it typified. At
length, climbing one of the pillars by means of the iron balustrade,
he took down the flag, and entered the mansion waving it above his
head. At the foot of the staircase he met the governor, booted and
spurred, with his cloak drawn around him, evidently on the point of
setting forth upon a journey.

 "Wretched lunatic, what do you seek here?" exclaimed Shute, extending
his cane to guard himself from contact. "There is nothing here but
Death; back, or you will meet him."

 "Death will not touch me, the banner-bearer of the pestilence," cried
Jervase Helwyse, shaking the red flag aloft. "Death and the
pestilence, who wears the aspect of the Lady Eleanore, will walk
through the streets to-night, and I must march before them with this
banner."

 "Why do I waste words on the fellow?" muttered the governor, drawing
his cloak across his mouth. "What matters his miserable life, when
none of us are sure of twelve hours' breath?—On, fool, to your own
destruction!"

 He made way for Jervase Helwyse, who immediately ascended the
staircase, but on the first landing-place was arrested by the firm
grasp of a hand upon his shoulder. Looking fiercely up with a madman's
impulse to struggle with and rend asunder his opponent, he found
himself powerless beneath a calm, stern eye which possessed the
mysterious property of quelling frenzy at its height. The person whom
he had now encountered was the physician, Dr. Clarke, the duties of
whose sad profession had led him to the province-house, where he was
an infrequent guest in more prosperous times.

 "Young man, what is your purpose?" demanded he.

 "I seek the Lady Eleanore," answered Jervase Helwyse, submissively.

 "All have fled from her," said the physician. "Why do you seek her
now? I tell you, youth, her nurse fell death-stricken on the threshold
of that fatal chamber. Know ye not that never came such a curse to our
shores as this lovely Lady Eleanore, that her breath has filled the
air with poison, that she has shaken pestilence and death upon the
land from the folds of her accursed mantle?"

 "Let me look upon her," rejoined the mad youth, more wildly. "Let me
behold her in her awful beauty, clad in the regal garments of the
pestilence. She and Death sit on a throne together; let me kneel down
before them."

 "Poor youth!" said Dr. Clarke, and, moved by a deep sense of human
weakness, a smile of caustic humor curled his lip even then. "Wilt
thou still worship the destroyer and surround her image with fantasies
the more magnificent the more evil she has wrought? Thus man doth ever
to his tyrants. Approach, then. Madness, as I have noted, has that
good efficacy that it will guard you from contagion, and perhaps its
own cure may be found in yonder chamber." Ascending another flight of
stairs, he threw open a door and signed to Jervase Helwyse that he
should enter.

 The poor lunatic, it seems probable, had cherished a delusion that his
haughty mistress sat in state, unharmed herself by the pestilential
influence which as by enchantment she scattered round about her. He
dreamed, no doubt, that her beauty was not dimmed, but brightened into
superhuman splendor. With such anticipations he stole reverentially to
the door at which the physician stood, but paused upon the threshold,
gazing fearfully into the gloom of the darkened chamber.

 "Where is the Lady Eleanore?" whispered he.

 "Call her," replied the physician.

 "Lady Eleanore! princess! queen of Death!" cried Jervase Helwyse,
advancing three steps into the chamber. "She is not here. There, on
yonder table, I behold the sparkle of a diamond which once she wore
upon her bosom. There"—and he shuddered—"there hangs her mantle, on
which a dead woman embroidered a spell of dreadful potency. But where
is the Lady Eleanore?"

 Something stirred within the silken curtains of a canopied bed and a
low moan was uttered, which, listening intently, Jervase Helwyse began
to distinguish as a woman's voice complaining dolefully of thirst. He
fancied, even, that he recognized its tones.

 "My throat! My throat is scorched," murmured the voice. "A drop of
water!"

 "What thing art thou?" said the brain-stricken youth, drawing near the
bed and tearing asunder its curtains. "Whose voice hast thou stolen
for thy murmurs and miserable petitions, as if Lady Eleanore could be
conscious of mortal infirmity? Fie! Heap of diseased mortality, why
lurkest thou in my lady's chamber?"

 "Oh, Jervase Helwyse," said the voice—and as it spoke the figure
contorted itself, struggling to hide its blasted face—"look not now
on the woman you once loved. The curse of Heaven hath stricken me
because I would not call man my brother nor woman sister. I wrapped
myself in pride as in a mantle and scorned the sympathies of nature,
and therefore has Nature made this wretched body the medium of a
dreadful sympathy. You are avenged, they are all avenged, Nature is
avenged; for I am Eleanore Rochcliffe."

 The malice of his mental disease, the bitterness lurking at the bottom
of his heart, mad as he was, for a blighted and ruined life and love
that had been paid with cruel scorn, awoke within the breast of
Jervase Helwyse. He shook his finger at the wretched girl, and the
chamber echoed, the curtains of the bed were shaken, with his outburst
of insane merriment.

 "Another triumph for the Lady Eleanore!" he cried. "All have been her
victims; who so worthy to be the final victim as herself?" Impelled by
some new fantasy of his crazed intellect, he snatched the fatal mantle
and rushed from the chamber and the house.

 That night a procession passed by torchlight through the streets,
bearing in the midst the figure of a woman enveloped with a
richly-embroidered mantle, while in advance stalked Jervase Helwyse
waving the red flag of the pestilence. Arriving opposite the
province-house, the mob burned the effigy, and a strong wind came and
swept away the ashes. It was said that from that very hour the
pestilence abated, as if its sway had some mysterious connection, from
the first plague-stroke to the last, with Lady Elcanore's mantle. A
remarkable uncertainty broods over that unhappy lady's fate. There is
a belief, however, that in a certain chamber of this mansion a female
form may sometimes be duskily discerned shrinking into the darkest
corner and muffling her face within an embroidered mantle. Supposing
the legend true, can this be other than the once proud Lady Eleanore?

  Mine host and the old loyalist and I bestowed no little Warmth of
applause upon this narrative, in which we had all been deeply
interested; for the reader can scarcely conceive how unspeakably the
effect of such a tale is heightened when, as in the present case, we
may repose perfect confidence in the veracity of him who tells it. For
my own part, knowing how scrupulous is Mr. Tiffany to settle the
foundation of his facts, I could not have believed him one whit the
more faithfully had he professed himself an eyewitness of the doings
and sufferings of poor Lady Eleanore. Some sceptics, it is true, might
demand documentary evidence, or even require him to produce the
embroidered mantle, forgetting that—Heaven be praised!—it was
consumed to ashes.

 But now the old loyalist, whose blood was warmed by the good cheer,
began to talk, in his turn, about the traditions of the Province
House, and hinted that he, if it were agreeable, might add a few
reminiscences to our legendary stock. Mr. Tiffany, having no cause to
dread a rival, immediately besought him to favor us with a specimen;
my own entreaties, of course, were urged to the same effect; and our
venerable guest, well pleased to find willing auditors, awaited only
the return of Mr. Thomas Waite, who had been summoned forth to provide
accommodations for several new arrivals. Perchance the public—but be
this as its own caprice and ours shall settle the matter—may read the
result in another tale of the Province House.

 

 

  IV. 



OLD ESTHER DUDLEY.

 Our host having resumed the chair, he as well as Mr. Tiffany and
myself expressed much eagerness to be made acquainted with the story
to which the loyalist had alluded. That venerable man first of all saw
lit to moisten his throat with another glass of wine, and then,
turning his face toward our coal-fire, looked steadfastly for a few
moments into the depths of its cheerful glow. Finally he poured forth
a great fluency of speech. The generous liquid that he had imbibed,
while it warmed his age-chilled blood, likewise took off the chill
from his heart and mind, and gave him an energy to think and feel
which we could hardly have expected to find beneath the snows of
fourscore winters. His feelings, indeed, appeared to me more excitable
than those of a younger man—or, at least, the same degree of feeling
manifested itself by more visible effects than if his judgment and
will had possessed the potency of meridian life. At the pathetic
passages of his narrative he readily melted into tears. When a breath
of indignation swept across his spirit, the blood flushed his withered
visage even to the roots of his white hair, and he shook his clinched
fist at the trio of peaceful auditors, seeming to fancy enemies in
those who felt very kindly toward the desolate old soul. But ever and
anon, sometimes in the midst of his most earnest talk, this ancient
person's intellect would wander vaguely, losing its hold of the matter
in hand and groping for it amid misty shadows. Then would he cackle
forth a feeble laugh and express a doubt whether his wits—for by that
phrase it pleased our ancient friend to signify his mental
powers—were not getting a little the worse for wear.

 Under these disadvantages, the old loyalist's story required more
revision to render it fit for the public eye than those of the series
which have preceded it; nor should it be concealed that the sentiment
and tone of the affair may have undergone some slight—or perchance
more than slight—metamorphosis in its transmission to the reader
through the medium of a thoroughgoing democrat. The tale itself is a
mere sketch with no involution of plot nor any great interest of
events, yet possessing, if I have rehearsed it aright, that pensive
influence over the mind which the shadow of the old Province House
flings upon the loiterer in its court-yard.

  The hour had come—the hour of defeat and humiliation—when Sir
William Howe was to pass over the threshold of the province-house and
embark, with no such triumphal ceremonies as he once promised himself,
on board the British fleet. He bade his servants and military
attendants go before him, and lingered a moment in the loneliness of
the mansion to quell the fierce emotions that struggled in his bosom
as with a death-throb. Preferable then would he have deemed his fate
had a warrior's death left him a claim to the narrow territory of a
grave within the soil which the king had given him to defend. With an
ominous perception that as his departing footsteps echoed adown the
staircase the sway of Britain was passing for ever from New England,
he smote his clenched hand on his brow and cursed the destiny that had
flung the shame of a dismembered empire upon him.

 "Would to God," cried he, hardly repressing his tears of rage, "that
the rebels were even now at the doorstep! A blood-stain upon the floor
should then bear testimony that the last British ruler was faithful to
his trust."

 The tremulous voice of a woman replied to his exclamation.

 "Heaven's cause and the king's are one," it said. "Go forth, Sir
William Howe, and trust in Heaven to bring back a royal governor in
triumph."

 Subduing at once the passion to which he had yielded only in the faith
that it was unwitnessed, Sir William Howe became conscious that an
aged woman leaning on a gold-headed staff was standing betwixt him and
the door. It was old Esther Dudley, who had dwelt almost immemorial
years in this mansion, until her presence seemed as inseparable from
it as the recollections of its history. She was the daughter of an
ancient and once eminent family which had fallen into poverty and
decay and left its last descendant no resource save the bounty of the
king, nor any shelter except within the walls of the province-house.
An office in the household with merely nominal duties had been
assigned to her as a pretext for the payment of a small pension, the
greater part of which she expended in adorning herself with an antique
magnificence of attire. The claims of Esther Dudley's gentle blood
were acknowledged by all the successive governors, and they treated
her with the punctilious courtesy which it was her foible to demand,
not always with success, from a neglectful world. The only actual
share which she assumed in the business of the mansion was to glide
through its passages and public chambers late at night to see that the
servants had dropped no fire from their flaring torches nor left
embers crackling and blazing on the hearths. Perhaps it was this
invariable custom of walking her rounds in the hush of midnight that
caused the superstition of the times to invest the old woman with
attributes of awe and mystery, fabling that she had entered the portal
of the province-house—none knew whence—in the train of the first
royal governor, and that it was her fate to dwell there till the last
should have departed.

 But Sir William Howe, if he ever heard this legend, had forgotten it.

 "Mistress Dudley, why are you loitering here?" asked he, with some
severity of tone. "It is my pleasure to be the last in this mansion of
the king."

 "Not so, if it please Your Excellency," answered the time-stricken
woman. "This roof has sheltered me long; I will not pass from it until
they bear me to the tomb of my forefathers. What other shelter is
there for old Esther Dudley save the province-house or the grave?"

 "Now, Heaven forgive me!" said Sir William Howe to himself. "I was
about to leave this wretched old creature to starve or beg.—Take
this, good Mistress Dudley," he added, putting a purse into her hands.
"King George's head on these golden guineas is sterling yet, and will
continue so, I warrant you, even should the rebels crown John Hancock
their king. That purse will buy a better shelter than the
province-house can now afford."

 "While the burden of life remains upon me I will have no other shelter
than this roof," persisted Esther Dudley, striking her staff upon the
floor with a gesture that expressed immovable resolve; "and when Your
Excellency returns in triumph, I will totter into the porch to welcome
you."

 "My poor old friend!" answered the British general, and all his manly
and martial pride could no longer restrain a gush of bitter tears.
"This is an evil hour for you and me. The province which the king
entrusted to my charge is lost. I go hence in misfortune—perchance in
disgrace—to return no more. And you, whose present being is
incorporated with the past, who have seen governor after governor in
stately pageantry ascend these steps, whose whole life has been an
observance of majestic ceremonies and a worship of the king,—how will
you endure the change? Come with us; bid farewell to a land that has
shaken off its allegiance, and live still under a royal government at
Halifax."

 "Never! never!" said the pertinacious old dame. "Here will I abide,
and King George shall still have one true subject in his disloyal
province."

 "Beshrew the old fool!" muttered Sir William Howe, growing impatient
of her obstinacy and ashamed of the emotion into which he had been
betrayed. "She is the very moral of old-fashioned prejudice, and could
exist nowhere but in this musty edifice.—Well, then, Mistress Dudley,
since you will needs tarry, I give the province-house in charge to
you. Take this key, and keep it safe until myself or some other royal
governor shall demand it of you." Smiling bitterly at himself and her,
he took the heavy key of the province-house, and, delivering it into
the old lady's hands, drew his cloak around him for departure.

 As the general glanced back at Esther Dudley's antique figure he
deemed her well fitted for such a charge, as being so perfect a
representative of the decayed past—of an age gone by, with its
manners, opinions, faith and feelings all fallen into oblivion or
scorn, of what had once been a reality, but was now merely a vision of
faded magnificence. Then Sir William Howe strode forth, smiting his
clenched hands together in the fierce anguish of his spirit, and old
Esther Dudley was left to keep watch in the lonely province-house,
dwelling there with Memory; and if Hope ever seemed to flit around
her, still it was Memory in disguise.

 The total change of affairs that ensued on the departure of the
British troops did not drive the venerable lady from her stronghold.
There was not for many years afterward a governor of Massachusetts,
and the magistrates who had charge of such matters saw no objection to
Esther Dudley's residence in the province-house, especially as they
must otherwise have paid a hireling for taking care of the premises,
which with her was a labor of love; and so they left her the
undisturbed mistress of the old historic edifice. Many and strange
were the fables which the gossips whispered about her in all the
chimney-corners of the town.

 Among the time-worn articles of furniture that had been left in the
mansion, there was a tall antique mirror which was well worthy of a
tale by itself, and perhaps may hereafter be the theme of one. The
gold of its heavily-wrought frame was tarnished, and its surface so
blurred that the old woman's figure, whenever she paused before it,
looked indistinct and ghostlike. But it was the general belief that
Esther could cause the governors of the overthrown dynasty, with the
beautiful ladies who had once adorned their festivals, the Indian
chiefs who had come up to the province-house to hold council or swear
allegiance, the grim provincial warriors, the severe clergymen—in
short, all the pageantry of gone days, all the figures that ever swept
across the broad-plate of glass in former times,—she could cause the
whole to reappear and people the inner world of the mirror with
shadows of old life. Such legends as these, together with the
singularity of her isolated existence, her age and the infirmity that
each added winter flung upon her, made Mistress Dudley the object both
of fear and pity, and it was partly the result of either sentiment
that, amid all the angry license of the times, neither wrong nor
insult ever fell upon her unprotected head. Indeed, there was so much
haughtiness in her demeanor toward intruders—among whom she reckoned
all persons acting under the new authorities—that it was really an
affair of no small nerve to look her in the face. And, to do the
people justice, stern republicans as they had now become, they were
well content that the old gentlewoman, in her hoop-petticoat and faded
embroidery, should still haunt the palace of ruined pride and
overthrown power, the symbol of a departed system, embodying a history
in her person. So Esther Dudley dwelt year after year in the
province-house, still reverencing all that others had flung aside,
still faithful to her king, who, so long as the venerable dame yet
held her post, might be said to retain one true subject in New England
and one spot of the empire that had been wrested from him.

 And did she dwell there in utter loneliness? Rumor said, "Not so."
Whenever her chill and withered heart desired warmth, she was wont to
summon a black slave of Governor Shirley's from the blurred mirror and
send him in search of guests who had long ago been familiar in those
deserted chambers. Forth went the sable messenger, with the starlight
or the moonshine gleaming through him, and did his errand in the
burial-grounds, knocking at the iron doors of tombs or upon the marble
slabs that covered them, and whispering to those within, "My mistress,
old Esther Dudley, bids you to the province-house at midnight;" and
punctually as the clock of the Old South told twelve came the shadows
of the Olivers, the Hutchinsons, the Dudleys—all the grandees of a
bygone generation—gliding beneath the portal into the well-known
mansion, where Esther mingled with them as if she likewise were a
shade. Without vouching for the truth of such traditions, it is
certain that Mistress Dudley sometimes assembled a few of the stanch
though crestfallen old Tories who had lingered in the rebel town
during those days of wrath and tribulation. Out of a cobwebbed bottle
containing liquor that a royal governor might have smacked his lips
over they quaffed healths to the king and babbled treason to the
republic, feeling as if the protecting shadow of the throne were still
flung around them. But, draining the last drops of their liquor, they
stole timorously homeward, and answered not again if the rude mob
reviled them in the street.

 Yet Esther Dudley's most frequent and favored guests were the children
of the town. Toward them she was never stern. A kindly and loving
nature hindered elsewhere from its free course by a thousand rocky
prejudices lavished itself upon these little ones. By bribes of
gingerbread of her own making, stamped with a royal crown, she tempted
their sunny sportiveness beneath the gloomy portal of the
province-house, and would often beguile them to spend a whole play-day
there, sitting in a circle round the verge of her hoop-petticoat,
greedily attentive to her stories of a dead world. And when these
little boys and girls stole forth again from the dark, mysterious
mansion, they went bewildered, full of old feelings that graver people
had long ago forgotten, rubbing their eyes at the world around them as
if they had gone astray into ancient times and become children of the
past. At home, when their parents asked where they had loitered such a
weary while and with whom they had been at play, the children would
talk of all the departed worthies of the province as far back as
Governor Belcher and the haughty dame of Sir William Phipps. It would
seem as though they had been sitting on the knees of these famous
personages, whom the grave had hidden for half a century, and had
toyed with the embroidery of their rich waistcoats or roguishly pulled
the long curls of their flowing wigs. "But Governor Belcher has been
dead this many a year," would the mother say to her little boy. "And
did you really see him at the province-house?"—"Oh yes, dear
mother—yes!" the half-dreaming child would answer. "But when old
Esther had done speaking about him, he faded away out of his chair."
Thus, without affrighting her little guests, she led them by the hand
into the chambers of her own desolate heart and made childhood's fancy
discern the ghosts that haunted there.

 Living so continually in her own circle of ideas, and never regulating
her mind by a proper reference to present things, Esther Dudley
appears to have grown partially crazed. It was found that she had no
right sense of the progress and true state of the Revolutionary war,
but held a constant faith that the armies of Britain were victorious
on every field and destined to be ultimately triumphant. Whenever the
town rejoiced for a battle won by Washington or Gates or Morgan or
Greene, the news, in passing through the door of the province-house as
through the ivory gate of dreams, became metamorphosed into a strange
tale of the prowess of Howe, Clinton or Cornwallis. Sooner or later,
it was her invincible belief, the colonies would be prostrate at the
footstool of the king. Sometimes she seemed to take for granted that
such was already the case. On one occasion she startled the
townspeople by a brilliant illumination of the province-house with
candles at every pane of glass and a transparency of the king's
initials and a crown of light in the great balcony-window. The figure
of the aged woman in the most gorgeous of her mildewed velvets and
brocades was seen passing from casement to casement, until she paused
before the balcony and flourished a huge key above her head. Her
wrinkled visage actually gleamed with triumph, as if the soul within
her were a festal lamp.

 "What means this blaze of light? What does old Esther's joy portend?"
whispered a spectator. "It is frightful to see her gliding about the
chambers and rejoicing there without a soul to bear her company."

 "It is as if she were making merry in a tomb," said another.

 "Pshaw! It is no such mystery," observed an old man, after some brief
exercise of memory. "Mistress Dudley is keeping jubilee for the king
of England's birthday."

 Then the people laughed aloud, and would have thrown mud against the
blazing transparency of the king's crown and initials, only that they
pitied the poor old dame who was so dismally triumphant amid the wreck
and ruin of the system to which she appertained.

 Oftentimes it was her custom to climb the weary staircase that wound
upward to the cupola, and thence strain her dimmed eyesight seaward
and countryward, watching for a British fleet or for the march of a
grand procession with the king's banner floating over it. The
passengers in the street below would discern her anxious visage and
send up a shout: "When the golden Indian on the province-house shall
shoot his arrow, and when the cock on the Old South spire shall crow,
then look for a royal governor again!" for this had grown a by-word
through the town. And at last, after long, long years, old Esther
Dudley knew—or perchance she only dreamed—that a royal governor was
on the eve of returning to the province-house to receive the heavy key
which Sir William Howe had committed to her charge. Now, it was the
fact that intelligence bearing some faint analogy to Esther's version
of it was current among the townspeople. She set the mansion in the
best order that her means allowed, and, arraying herself in silks and
tarnished gold, stood long before the blurred mirror to admire her own
magnificence. As she gazed the gray and withered lady moved her ashen
lips, murmuring half aloud, talking to shapes that she saw within the
mirror, to shadows of her own fantasies, to the household friends of
memory, and bidding them rejoice with her and come forth to meet the
governor. And while absorbed in this communion Mistress Dudley heard
the tramp of many footsteps in the street, and, looking out at the
window, beheld what she construed as the royal governor's arrival.

 "Oh, happy day! Oh, blessed, blessed hour!" she exclaimed. "Let me but
bid him welcome within the portal, and my task in the province-house
and on earth is done." Then, with tottering feet which age and
tremulous joy caused to tread amiss, she hurried down the grand
staircase, her silks sweeping and rustling as she went; so that the
sound was as if a train of special courtiers were thronging from the
dim mirror.

 And Esther Dudley fancied that as soon as the wide door should be
flung open all the pomp and splendor of bygone times would pace
majestically into the province-house and the gilded tapestry of the
past would be brightened by the sunshine of the present. She turned
the key, withdrew it from the lock, unclosed the door and stepped
across the threshold. Advancing up the court-yard appeared a person of
most dignified mien, with tokens, as Esther interpreted them, of
gentle blood, high rank and long-accustomed authority even in his walk
and every gesture. He was richly dressed, but wore a gouty shoe,
which, however, did not lessen the stateliness of his gait. Around and
behind him were people in plain civic dresses and two or three
war-worn veterans—evidently officers of rank—arrayed in a uniform of
blue and buff. But Esther Dudley, firm in the belief that had fastened
its roots about her heart, beheld only the principal personage, and
never doubted that this was the long-looked-for governor to whom she
was to surrender up her charge. As he approached she involuntarily
sank down on her knees and tremblingly held forth the heavy key.

 "Receive my trust! Take it quickly," cried she, "for methinks Death is
striving to snatch away my triumph. But he comes too late. Thank
Heaven for this blessed hour! God save King George!"

 "That, madam, is a strange prayer to be offered up at such a moment,"
replied the unknown guest of the province-house, and, courteously
removing his hat, he offered his arm to raise the aged woman. "Yet, in
reverence for your gray hairs and long-kept faith, Heaven forbid that
any here should say you nay. Over the realms which still acknowledge
his sceptre, God save King George!"

 Esther Dudley started to her feet, and, hastily clutching back the
key, gazed with fearful earnestness at the stranger, and dimly and
doubtfully, as if suddenly awakened from a dream, her bewildered eyes
half recognized his face. Years ago she had known him among the gentry
of the province, but the ban of the king had fallen upon him. How,
then, came the doomed victim here? Proscribed, excluded from mercy,
the monarch's most dreaded and hated foe, this New England merchant
had stood triumphantly against a kingdom's strength, and his foot now
trod upon humbled royalty as he ascended the steps of the
province-house, the people's chosen governor of Massachusetts.

 "Wretch, wretch that I am!" muttered the old woman, with such a
heartbroken expression that the tears gushed from the stranger's eyes.
"Have I bidden a traitor welcome?—Come, Death! come quickly!"

 "Alas, venerable lady!" said Governor Hancock, lending her his support
with all the reverence that a courtier would have shown to a queen,
"your life has been prolonged until the world has changed around you.
You have treasured up all that time has rendered worthless—the
principles, feelings, manners, modes of being and acting which another
generation has flung aside—and you are a symbol of the past. And I
and these around me—we represent a new race of men, living no longer
in the past, scarcely in the present, but projecting our lives forward
into the future. Ceasing to model ourselves on ancestral superstitions,
it is our faith and principle to press onward—onward.—Yet," continued
he, turning to his attendants, "let us reverence for the last time the
stately and gorgeous prejudices of the tottering past."

 While the republican governor spoke he had continued to support the
helpless form of Esther Dudley; her weight grew heavier against his
arm, but at last, with a sudden effort to free herself, the ancient
woman sank down beside one of the pillars of the portal. The key of
the province-house fell from her grasp and clanked against the stone.

 "I have been faithful unto death," murmured she. "God save the king!"

 "She hath done her office," said Hancock, solemnly. "We will follow her
reverently to the tomb of her ancestors, and then, my fellow-citizens,
onward—onward. We are no longer children of the past."

 As the old loyalist concluded his narrative the enthusiasm which had
been fitfully flashing within his sunken eyes and quivering across his
wrinkled visage faded away, as if all the lingering fire of his soul
were extinguished. Just then, too, a lamp upon the mantelpiece threw
out a dying gleam, which vanished as speedily as it shot upward,
compelling our eyes to grope for one another's features by the dim
glow of the hearth. With such a lingering fire, methought, with such a
dying gleam, had the glory of the ancient system vanished from the
province-house when the spirit of old Esther Dudley took its flight.
And now, again, the clock of the Old South threw its voice of ages on
the breeze, knolling the hourly knell of the past, crying out far and
wide through the multitudinous city, and filling our ears, as we sat
in the dusky chamber, with its reverberating depth of tone. In that
same mansion—in that very chamber—what a volume of history had been
told off into hours by the same voice that was now trembling in the
air! Many a governor had heard those midnight accents and longed to
exchange his stately cares for slumber. And, as for mine host and Mr.
Bela Tiffany and the old loyalist and me, we had babbled about dreams
of the past until we almost fancied that the clock was still striking
in a bygone century. Neither of us would have wondered had a
hoop-petticoated phantom of Esther Dudley tottered into the chamber,
walking her rounds in the hush of midnight as of yore, and motioned us
to quench the fading embers of the fire and leave the historic
precincts to herself and her kindred shades. But, as no such vision
was vouchsafed, I retired unbidden, and would advise Mr. Tiffany to
lay hold of another auditor, being resolved not to show my face in the
Province House for a good while hence—if ever.