GOOSEBERRIES

THE whole sky had been overcast with rain-clouds from early morning; it
was a still day, not hot, but heavy, as it is in grey dull weather when
the clouds have been hanging over the country for a long while, when one
expects rain and it does not come. Ivan Ivanovitch, the veterinary
surgeon, and Burkin, the high-school teacher, were already tired from
walking, and the fields seemed to them endless. Far ahead of them they
could just see the windmills of the village of Mironositskoe; on the right
stretched a row of hillocks which disappeared in the distance behind the
village, and they both knew that this was the bank of the river, that
there were meadows, green willows, homesteads there, and that if one stood
on one of the hillocks one could see from it the same vast plain,
telegraph-wires, and a train which in the distance looked like a crawling
caterpillar, and that in clear weather one could even see the town. Now,
in still weather, when all nature seemed mild and dreamy, Ivan Ivanovitch
and Burkin were filled with love of that countryside, and both thought how
great, how beautiful a land it was.


“Last time we were in Prokofy’s barn,” said Burkin, “you were about to
tell me a story.”


“Yes; I meant to tell you about my brother.”


Ivan Ivanovitch heaved a deep sigh and lighted a pipe to begin to tell his
story, but just at that moment the rain began. And five minutes later
heavy rain came down, covering the sky, and it was hard to tell when it
would be over. Ivan Ivanovitch and Burkin stopped in hesitation; the dogs,
already drenched, stood with their tails between their legs gazing at them
feelingly.


“We must take shelter somewhere,” said Burkin. “Let us go to Alehin’s;
it’s close by.”


“Come along.”


They turned aside and walked through mown fields, sometimes going straight
forward, sometimes turning to the right, till they came out on the road.
Soon they saw poplars, a garden, then the red roofs of barns; there was a
gleam of the river, and the view opened on to a broad expanse of water
with a windmill and a white bath-house: this was Sofino, where Alehin
lived.


The watermill was at work, drowning the sound of the rain; the dam was
shaking. Here wet horses with drooping heads were standing near their
carts, and men were walking about covered with sacks. It was damp, muddy,
and desolate; the water looked cold and malignant. Ivan Ivanovitch and
Burkin were already conscious of a feeling of wetness, messiness, and
discomfort all over; their feet were heavy with mud, and when, crossing
the dam, they went up to the barns, they were silent, as though they were
angry with one another.


In one of the barns there was the sound of a winnowing machine, the door
was open, and clouds of dust were coming from it. In the doorway was
standing Alehin himself, a man of forty, tall and stout, with long hair,
more like a professor or an artist than a landowner. He had on a white
shirt that badly needed washing, a rope for a belt, drawers instead of
trousers, and his boots, too, were plastered up with mud and straw. His
eyes and nose were black with dust. He recognized Ivan Ivanovitch and
Burkin, and was apparently much delighted to see them.


“Go into the house, gentlemen,” he said, smiling; “I’ll come directly,
this minute.”


It was a big two-storeyed house. Alehin lived in the lower storey, with
arched ceilings and little windows, where the bailiffs had once lived;
here everything was plain, and there was a smell of rye bread, cheap
vodka, and harness. He went upstairs into the best rooms only on rare
occasions, when visitors came. Ivan Ivanovitch and Burkin were met in the
house by a maid-servant, a young woman so beautiful that they both stood
still and looked at one another.


“You can’t imagine how delighted I am to see you, my friends,” said
Alehin, going into the hall with them. “It is a surprise! Pelagea,” he
said, addressing the girl, “give our visitors something to change into.
And, by the way, I will change too. Only I must first go and wash, for I
almost think I have not washed since spring. Wouldn’t you like to come
into the bath-house? and meanwhile they will get things ready here.”


Beautiful Pelagea, looking so refined and soft, brought them towels and
soap, and Alehin went to the bath-house with his guests.


“It’s a long time since I had a wash,” he said, undressing. “I have got a
nice bath-house, as you see—my father built it—but I somehow
never have time to wash.”


He sat down on the steps and soaped his long hair and his neck, and the
water round him turned brown.


“Yes, I must say,” said Ivan Ivanovitch meaningly, looking at his head.


“It’s a long time since I washed...” said Alehin with embarrassment,
giving himself a second soaping, and the water near him turned dark blue,
like ink.


Ivan Ivanovitch went outside, plunged into the water with a loud splash,
and swam in the rain, flinging his arms out wide. He stirred the water
into waves which set the white lilies bobbing up and down; he swam to the
very middle of the millpond and dived, and came up a minute later in
another place, and swam on, and kept on diving, trying to touch the
bottom.


“Oh, my goodness!” he repeated continually, enjoying himself thoroughly.
“Oh, my goodness!” He swam to the mill, talked to the peasants there, then
returned and lay on his back in the middle of the pond, turning his face
to the rain. Burkin and Alehin were dressed and ready to go, but he still
went on swimming and diving. “Oh, my goodness!...” he said. “Oh, Lord,
have mercy on me!...”


“That’s enough!” Burkin shouted to him.


They went back to the house. And only when the lamp was lighted in the big
drawing-room upstairs, and Burkin and Ivan Ivanovitch, attired in silk
dressing-gowns and warm slippers, were sitting in arm-chairs; and Alehin,
washed and combed, in a new coat, was walking about the drawing-room,
evidently enjoying the feeling of warmth, cleanliness, dry clothes, and
light shoes; and when lovely Pelagea, stepping noiselessly on the carpet
and smiling softly, handed tea and jam on a tray—only then Ivan
Ivanovitch began on his story, and it seemed as though not only Burkin and
Alehin were listening, but also the ladies, young and old, and the
officers who looked down upon them sternly and calmly from their gold
frames.


“There are two of us brothers,” he began—“I, Ivan Ivanovitch, and my
brother, Nikolay Ivanovitch, two years younger. I went in for a learned
profession and became a veterinary surgeon, while Nikolay sat in a
government office from the time he was nineteen. Our father,
Tchimsha-Himalaisky, was a kantonist, but he rose to be an officer and
left us a little estate and the rank of nobility. After his death the
little estate went in debts and legal expenses; but, anyway, we had spent
our childhood running wild in the country. Like peasant children, we
passed our days and nights in the fields and the woods, looked after
horses, stripped the bark off the trees, fished, and so on.... And, you
know, whoever has once in his life caught perch or has seen the migrating
of the thrushes in autumn, watched how they float in flocks over the
village on bright, cool days, he will never be a real townsman, and will
have a yearning for freedom to the day of his death. My brother was
miserable in the government office. Years passed by, and he went on
sitting in the same place, went on writing the same papers and thinking of
one and the same thing—how to get into the country. And this
yearning by degrees passed into a definite desire, into a dream of buying
himself a little farm somewhere on the banks of a river or a lake.


“He was a gentle, good-natured fellow, and I was fond of him, but I never
sympathized with this desire to shut himself up for the rest of his life
in a little farm of his own. It’s the correct thing to say that a man
needs no more than six feet of earth. But six feet is what a corpse needs,
not a man. And they say, too, now, that if our intellectual classes are
attracted to the land and yearn for a farm, it’s a good thing. But these
farms are just the same as six feet of earth. To retreat from town, from
the struggle, from the bustle of life, to retreat and bury oneself in
one’s farm—it’s not life, it’s egoism, laziness, it’s monasticism of
a sort, but monasticism without good works. A man does not need six feet
of earth or a farm, but the whole globe, all nature, where he can have
room to display all the qualities and peculiarities of his free spirit.


“My brother Nikolay, sitting in his government office, dreamed of how he
would eat his own cabbages, which would fill the whole yard with such a
savoury smell, take his meals on the green grass, sleep in the sun, sit
for whole hours on the seat by the gate gazing at the fields and the
forest. Gardening books and the agricultural hints in calendars were his
delight, his favourite spiritual sustenance; he enjoyed reading
newspapers, too, but the only things he read in them were the
advertisements of so many acres of arable land and a grass meadow with
farm-houses and buildings, a river, a garden, a mill and millponds, for
sale. And his imagination pictured the garden-paths, flowers and fruit,
starling cotes, the carp in the pond, and all that sort of thing, you
know. These imaginary pictures were of different kinds according to the
advertisements which he came across, but for some reason in every one of
them he had always to have gooseberries. He could not imagine a homestead,
he could not picture an idyllic nook, without gooseberries.


“‘Country life has its conveniences,’ he would sometimes say. ‘You sit on
the verandah and you drink tea, while your ducks swim on the pond, there
is a delicious smell everywhere, and... and the gooseberries are growing.’


“He used to draw a map of his property, and in every map there were the
same things—(a) house for the family, (b) servants’ quarters, (c)
kitchen-garden, (d) gooseberry-bushes. He lived parsimoniously, was frugal
in food and drink, his clothes were beyond description; he looked like a
beggar, but kept on saving and putting money in the bank. He grew
fearfully avaricious. I did not like to look at him, and I used to give
him something and send him presents for Christmas and Easter, but he used
to save that too. Once a man is absorbed by an idea there is no doing
anything with him.


“Years passed: he was transferred to another province. He was over forty,
and he was still reading the advertisements in the papers and saving up.
Then I heard he was married. Still with the same object of buying a farm
and having gooseberries, he married an elderly and ugly widow without a
trace of feeling for her, simply because she had filthy lucre. He went on
living frugally after marrying her, and kept her short of food, while he
put her money in the bank in his name.


“Her first husband had been a postmaster, and with him she was accustomed
to pies and home-made wines, while with her second husband she did not get
enough black bread; she began to pine away with this sort of life, and
three years later she gave up her soul to God. And I need hardly say that
my brother never for one moment imagined that he was responsible for her
death. Money, like vodka, makes a man queer. In our town there was a
merchant who, before he died, ordered a plateful of honey and ate up all
his money and lottery tickets with the honey, so that no one might get the
benefit of it. While I was inspecting cattle at a railway-station, a
cattle-dealer fell under an engine and had his leg cut off. We carried him
into the waiting-room, the blood was flowing—it was a horrible thing—and
he kept asking them to look for his leg and was very much worried about
it; there were twenty roubles in the boot on the leg that had been cut
off, and he was afraid they would be lost.”


“That’s a story from a different opera,” said Burkin.


“After his wife’s death,” Ivan Ivanovitch went on, after thinking for half
a minute, “my brother began looking out for an estate for himself. Of
course, you may look about for five years and yet end by making a mistake,
and buying something quite different from what you have dreamed of. My
brother Nikolay bought through an agent a mortgaged estate of three
hundred and thirty acres, with a house for the family, with servants’
quarters, with a park, but with no orchard, no gooseberry-bushes, and no
duck-pond; there was a river, but the water in it was the colour of
coffee, because on one side of the estate there was a brickyard and on the
other a factory for burning bones. But Nikolay Ivanovitch did not grieve
much; he ordered twenty gooseberry-bushes, planted them, and began living
as a country gentleman.


“Last year I went to pay him a visit. I thought I would go and see what it
was like. In his letters my brother called his estate ‘Tchumbaroklov
Waste, alias Himalaiskoe.’ I reached ‘alias Himalaiskoe’ in the afternoon.
It was hot. Everywhere there were ditches, fences, hedges, fir-trees
planted in rows, and there was no knowing how to get to the yard, where to
put one’s horse. I went up to the house, and was met by a fat red dog that
looked like a pig. It wanted to bark, but it was too lazy. The cook, a
fat, barefooted woman, came out of the kitchen, and she, too, looked like
a pig, and said that her master was resting after dinner. I went in to see
my brother. He was sitting up in bed with a quilt over his legs; he had
grown older, fatter, wrinkled; his cheeks, his nose, and his mouth all
stuck out—he looked as though he might begin grunting into the quilt
at any moment.


“We embraced each other, and shed tears of joy and of sadness at the
thought that we had once been young and now were both grey-headed and near
the grave. He dressed, and led me out to show me the estate.


“‘Well, how are you getting on here?’ I asked.


“‘Oh, all right, thank God; I am getting on very well.’


“He was no more a poor timid clerk, but a real landowner, a gentleman. He
was already accustomed to it, had grown used to it, and liked it. He ate a
great deal, went to the bath-house, was growing stout, was already at law
with the village commune and both factories, and was very much offended
when the peasants did not call him ‘Your Honour.’ And he concerned himself
with the salvation of his soul in a substantial, gentlemanly manner, and
performed deeds of charity, not simply, but with an air of consequence.
And what deeds of charity! He treated the peasants for every sort of
disease with soda and castor oil, and on his name-day had a thanksgiving
service in the middle of the village, and then treated the peasants to a
gallon of vodka—he thought that was the thing to do. Oh, those
horrible gallons of vodka! One day the fat landowner hauls the peasants up
before the district captain for trespass, and next day, in honour of a
holiday, treats them to a gallon of vodka, and they drink and shout
‘Hurrah!’ and when they are drunk bow down to his feet. A change of life
for the better, and being well-fed and idle develop in a Russian the most
insolent self-conceit. Nikolay Ivanovitch, who at one time in the
government office was afraid to have any views of his own, now could say
nothing that was not gospel truth, and uttered such truths in the tone of
a prime minister. ‘Education is essential, but for the peasants it is
premature.’ ‘Corporal punishment is harmful as a rule, but in some cases
it is necessary and there is nothing to take its place.’


“‘I know the peasants and understand how to treat them,’ he would say.
‘The peasants like me. I need only to hold up my little finger and the
peasants will do anything I like.’


“And all this, observe, was uttered with a wise, benevolent smile. He
repeated twenty times over ‘We noblemen,’ ‘I as a noble’; obviously he did
not remember that our grandfather was a peasant, and our father a soldier.
Even our surname Tchimsha-Himalaisky, in reality so incongruous, seemed to
him now melodious, distinguished, and very agreeable.


“But the point just now is not he, but myself. I want to tell you about
the change that took place in me during the brief hours I spent at his
country place. In the evening, when we were drinking tea, the cook put on
the table a plateful of gooseberries. They were not bought, but his own
gooseberries, gathered for the first time since the bushes were planted.
Nikolay Ivanovitch laughed and looked for a minute in silence at the
gooseberries, with tears in his eyes; he could not speak for excitement.
Then he put one gooseberry in his mouth, looked at me with the triumph of
a child who has at last received his favourite toy, and said:


“‘How delicious!’


“And he ate them greedily, continually repeating, ‘Ah, how delicious! Do
taste them!’


“They were sour and unripe, but, as Pushkin says:


“‘Dearer to us the falsehood that exalts
Than hosts of baser truths.’


“I saw a happy man whose cherished dream was so obviously fulfilled, who
had attained his object in life, who had gained what he wanted, who was
satisfied with his fate and himself. There is always, for some reason, an
element of sadness mingled with my thoughts of human happiness, and, on
this occasion, at the sight of a happy man I was overcome by an oppressive
feeling that was close upon despair. It was particularly oppressive at
night. A bed was made up for me in the room next to my brother’s bedroom,
and I could hear that he was awake, and that he kept getting up and going
to the plate of gooseberries and taking one. I reflected how many
satisfied, happy people there really are! What a suffocating force it is!
You look at life: the insolence and idleness of the strong, the ignorance
and brutishness of the weak, incredible poverty all about us,
overcrowding, degeneration, drunkenness, hypocrisy, lying.... Yet all is
calm and stillness in the houses and in the streets; of the fifty thousand
living in a town, there is not one who would cry out, who would give vent
to his indignation aloud. We see the people going to market for
provisions, eating by day, sleeping by night, talking their silly
nonsense, getting married, growing old, serenely escorting their dead to
the cemetery; but we do not see and we do not hear those who suffer, and
what is terrible in life goes on somewhere behind the scenes....
Everything is quiet and peaceful, and nothing protests but mute
statistics: so many people gone out of their minds, so many gallons of
vodka drunk, so many children dead from malnutrition.... And this order of
things is evidently necessary; evidently the happy man only feels at ease
because the unhappy bear their burdens in silence, and without that
silence happiness would be impossible. It’s a case of general hypnotism.
There ought to be behind the door of every happy, contented man some one
standing with a hammer continually reminding him with a tap that there are
unhappy people; that however happy he may be, life will show him her laws
sooner or later, trouble will come for him—disease, poverty, losses,
and no one will see or hear, just as now he neither sees nor hears others.
But there is no man with a hammer; the happy man lives at his ease, and
trivial daily cares faintly agitate him like the wind in the aspen-tree—and
all goes well.


“That night I realized that I, too, was happy and contented,” Ivan
Ivanovitch went on, getting up. “I, too, at dinner and at the hunt liked
to lay down the law on life and religion, and the way to manage the
peasantry. I, too, used to say that science was light, that culture was
essential, but for the simple people reading and writing was enough for
the time. Freedom is a blessing, I used to say; we can no more do without
it than without air, but we must wait a little. Yes, I used to talk like
that, and now I ask, ‘For what reason are we to wait?’” asked Ivan
Ivanovitch, looking angrily at Burkin. “Why wait, I ask you? What grounds
have we for waiting? I shall be told, it can’t be done all at once; every
idea takes shape in life gradually, in its due time. But who is it says
that? Where is the proof that it’s right? You will fall back upon the
natural order of things, the uniformity of phenomena; but is there order
and uniformity in the fact that I, a living, thinking man, stand over a
chasm and wait for it to close of itself, or to fill up with mud at the
very time when perhaps I might leap over it or build a bridge across it?
And again, wait for the sake of what? Wait till there’s no strength to
live? And meanwhile one must live, and one wants to live!


“I went away from my brother’s early in the morning, and ever since then
it has been unbearable for me to be in town. I am oppressed by its peace
and quiet; I am afraid to look at the windows, for there is no spectacle
more painful to me now than the sight of a happy family sitting round the
table drinking tea. I am old and am not fit for the struggle; I am not
even capable of hatred; I can only grieve inwardly, feel irritated and
vexed; but at night my head is hot from the rush of ideas, and I cannot
sleep.... Ah, if I were young!”


Ivan Ivanovitch walked backwards and forwards in excitement, and repeated:
“If I were young!”


He suddenly went up to Alehin and began pressing first one of his hands
and then the other.


“Pavel Konstantinovitch,” he said in an imploring voice, “don’t be calm
and contented, don’t let yourself be put to sleep! While you are young,
strong, confident, be not weary in well-doing! There is no happiness, and
there ought not to be; but if there is a meaning and an object in life,
that meaning and object is not our happiness, but something greater and
more rational. Do good!”


And all this Ivan Ivanovitch said with a pitiful, imploring smile, as
though he were asking him a personal favour.


Then all three sat in arm-chairs at different ends of the drawing-room and
were silent. Ivan Ivanovitch’s story had not satisfied either Burkin or
Alehin. When the generals and ladies gazed down from their gilt frames,
looking in the dusk as though they were alive, it was dreary to listen to
the story of the poor clerk who ate gooseberries. They felt inclined, for
some reason, to talk about elegant people, about women. And their sitting
in the drawing-room where everything—the chandeliers in their
covers, the arm-chairs, and the carpet under their feet—reminded
them that those very people who were now looking down from their frames
had once moved about, sat, drunk tea in this room, and the fact that
lovely Pelagea was moving noiselessly about was better than any story.


Alehin was fearfully sleepy; he had got up early, before three o’clock in
the morning, to look after his work, and now his eyes were closing; but he
was afraid his visitors might tell some interesting story after he had
gone, and he lingered on. He did not go into the question whether what
Ivan Ivanovitch had just said was right and true. His visitors did not
talk of groats, nor of hay, nor of tar, but of something that had no
direct bearing on his life, and he was glad and wanted them to go on.


“It’s bed-time, though,” said Burkin, getting up. “Allow me to wish you
good-night.”


Alehin said good-night and went downstairs to his own domain, while the
visitors remained upstairs. They were both taken for the night to a big
room where there stood two old wooden beds decorated with carvings, and in
the corner was an ivory crucifix. The big cool beds, which had been made
by the lovely Pelagea, smelt agreeably of clean linen.


Ivan Ivanovitch undressed in silence and got into bed.


“Lord forgive us sinners!” he said, and put his head under the quilt.


His pipe lying on the table smelt strongly of stale tobacco, and Burkin
could not sleep for a long while, and kept wondering where the oppressive
smell came from.


The rain was pattering on the window-panes all night.








ABOUT LOVE

AT lunch next day there were very nice pies, crayfish, and mutton cutlets;
and while we were eating, Nikanor, the cook, came up to ask what the
visitors would like for dinner. He was a man of medium height, with a
puffy face and little eyes; he was close-shaven, and it looked as though
his moustaches had not been shaved, but had been pulled out by the roots.
Alehin told us that the beautiful Pelagea was in love with this cook. As
he drank and was of a violent character, she did not want to marry him,
but was willing to live with him without. He was very devout, and his
religious convictions would not allow him to “live in sin”; he insisted on
her marrying him, and would consent to nothing else, and when he was drunk
he used to abuse her and even beat her. Whenever he got drunk she used to
hide upstairs and sob, and on such occasions Alehin and the servants
stayed in the house to be ready to defend her in case of necessity.


We began talking about love.


“How love is born,” said Alehin, “why Pelagea does not love somebody more
like herself in her spiritual and external qualities, and why she fell in
love with Nikanor, that ugly snout—we all call him ‘The Snout’—how
far questions of personal happiness are of consequence in love—all
that is known; one can take what view one likes of it. So far only one
incontestable truth has been uttered about love: ‘This is a great
mystery.’ Everything else that has been written or said about love is not
a conclusion, but only a statement of questions which have remained
unanswered. The explanation which would seem to fit one case does not
apply in a dozen others, and the very best thing, to my mind, would be to
explain every case individually without attempting to generalize. We
ought, as the doctors say, to individualize each case.”


“Perfectly true,” Burkin assented.


“We Russians of the educated class have a partiality for these questions
that remain unanswered. Love is usually poeticized, decorated with roses,
nightingales; we Russians decorate our loves with these momentous
questions, and select the most uninteresting of them, too. In Moscow, when
I was a student, I had a friend who shared my life, a charming lady, and
every time I took her in my arms she was thinking what I would allow her a
month for housekeeping and what was the price of beef a pound. In the same
way, when we are in love we are never tired of asking ourselves questions:
whether it is honourable or dishonourable, sensible or stupid, what this
love is leading up to, and so on. Whether it is a good thing or not I
don’t know, but that it is in the way, unsatisfactory, and irritating, I
do know.”


It looked as though he wanted to tell some story. People who lead a
solitary existence always have something in their hearts which they are
eager to talk about. In town bachelors visit the baths and the restaurants
on purpose to talk, and sometimes tell the most interesting things to bath
attendants and waiters; in the country, as a rule, they unbosom themselves
to their guests. Now from the window we could see a grey sky, trees
drenched in the rain; in such weather we could go nowhere, and there was
nothing for us to do but to tell stories and to listen.


“I have lived at Sofino and been farming for a long time,” Alehin began,
“ever since I left the University. I am an idle gentleman by education, a
studious person by disposition; but there was a big debt owing on the
estate when I came here, and as my father was in debt partly because he
had spent so much on my education, I resolved not to go away, but to work
till I paid off the debt. I made up my mind to this and set to work, not,
I must confess, without some repugnance. The land here does not yield
much, and if one is not to farm at a loss one must employ serf labour or
hired labourers, which is almost the same thing, or put it on a peasant
footing—that is, work the fields oneself and with one’s family.
There is no middle path. But in those days I did not go into such
subtleties. I did not leave a clod of earth unturned; I gathered together
all the peasants, men and women, from the neighbouring villages; the work
went on at a tremendous pace. I myself ploughed and sowed and reaped, and
was bored doing it, and frowned with disgust, like a village cat driven by
hunger to eat cucumbers in the kitchen-garden. My body ached, and I slept
as I walked. At first it seemed to me that I could easily reconcile this
life of toil with my cultured habits; to do so, I thought, all that is
necessary is to maintain a certain external order in life. I established
myself upstairs here in the best rooms, and ordered them to bring me there
coffee and liquor after lunch and dinner, and when I went to bed I read
every night the Yyesnik Evropi. But one day our priest, Father
Ivan, came and drank up all my liquor at one sitting; and the Yyesnik
Evropi went to the priest’s daughters; as in the summer, especially at
the haymaking, I did not succeed in getting to my bed at all, and slept in
the sledge in the barn, or somewhere in the forester’s lodge, what chance
was there of reading? Little by little I moved downstairs, began dining in
the servants’ kitchen, and of my former luxury nothing is left but the
servants who were in my father’s service, and whom it would be painful to
turn away.


“In the first years I was elected here an honourary justice of the peace.
I used to have to go to the town and take part in the sessions of the
congress and of the circuit court, and this was a pleasant change for me.
When you live here for two or three months without a break, especially in
the winter, you begin at last to pine for a black coat. And in the circuit
court there were frock-coats, and uniforms, and dress-coats, too, all
lawyers, men who have received a general education; I had some one to talk
to. After sleeping in the sledge and dining in the kitchen, to sit in an
arm-chair in clean linen, in thin boots, with a chain on one’s waistcoat,
is such luxury!


“I received a warm welcome in the town. I made friends eagerly. And of all
my acquaintanceships the most intimate and, to tell the truth, the most
agreeable to me was my acquaintance with Luganovitch, the vice-president
of the circuit court. You both know him: a most charming personality. It
all happened just after a celebrated case of incendiarism; the preliminary
investigation lasted two days; we were exhausted. Luganovitch looked at me
and said:


“‘Look here, come round to dinner with me.’


“This was unexpected, as I knew Luganovitch very little, only officially,
and I had never been to his house. I only just went to my hotel room to
change and went off to dinner. And here it was my lot to meet Anna
Alexyevna, Luganovitch’s wife. At that time she was still very young, not
more than twenty-two, and her first baby had been born just six months
before. It is all a thing of the past; and now I should find it difficult
to define what there was so exceptional in her, what it was in her
attracted me so much; at the time, at dinner, it was all perfectly clear
to me. I saw a lovely young, good, intelligent, fascinating woman, such as
I had never met before; and I felt her at once some one close and already
familiar, as though that face, those cordial, intelligent eyes, I had seen
somewhere in my childhood, in the album which lay on my mother’s chest of
drawers.


“Four Jews were charged with being incendiaries, were regarded as a gang
of robbers, and, to my mind, quite groundlessly. At dinner I was very much
excited, I was uncomfortable, and I don’t know what I said, but Anna
Alexyevna kept shaking her head and saying to her husband:


“‘Dmitry, how is this?’


“Luganovitch is a good-natured man, one of those simple-hearted people who
firmly maintain the opinion that once a man is charged before a court he
is guilty, and to express doubt of the correctness of a sentence cannot be
done except in legal form on paper, and not at dinner and in private
conversation.


“‘You and I did not set fire to the place,’ he said softly, ‘and you see
we are not condemned, and not in prison.’


“And both husband and wife tried to make me eat and drink as much as
possible. From some trifling details, from the way they made the coffee
together, for instance, and from the way they understood each other at
half a word, I could gather that they lived in harmony and comfort, and
that they were glad of a visitor. After dinner they played a duet on the
piano; then it got dark, and I went home. That was at the beginning of
spring.


“After that I spent the whole summer at Sofino without a break, and I had
no time to think of the town, either, but the memory of the graceful
fair-haired woman remained in my mind all those days; I did not think of
her, but it was as though her light shadow were lying on my heart.


“In the late autumn there was a theatrical performance for some charitable
object in the town. I went into the governor’s box (I was invited to go
there in the interval); I looked, and there was Anna Alexyevna sitting
beside the governor’s wife; and again the same irresistible, thrilling
impression of beauty and sweet, caressing eyes, and again the same feeling
of nearness. We sat side by side, then went to the foyer.


“‘You’ve grown thinner,’ she said; ‘have you been ill?’


“‘Yes, I’ve had rheumatism in my shoulder, and in rainy weather I can’t
sleep.’


“‘You look dispirited. In the spring, when you came to dinner, you were
younger, more confident. You were full of eagerness, and talked a great
deal then; you were very interesting, and I really must confess I was a
little carried away by you. For some reason you often came back to my
memory during the summer, and when I was getting ready for the theatre
today I thought I should see you.’


“And she laughed.


“‘But you look dispirited today,’ she repeated; ‘it makes you seem older.’


“The next day I lunched at the Luganovitchs’. After lunch they drove out
to their summer villa, in order to make arrangements there for the winter,
and I went with them. I returned with them to the town, and at midnight
drank tea with them in quiet domestic surroundings, while the fire glowed,
and the young mother kept going to see if her baby girl was asleep. And
after that, every time I went to town I never failed to visit the
Luganovitchs. They grew used to me, and I grew used to them. As a rule I
went in unannounced, as though I were one of the family.


“‘Who is there?’ I would hear from a faraway room, in the drawling voice
that seemed to me so lovely.


“‘It is Pavel Konstantinovitch,’ answered the maid or the nurse.


“Anna Alexyevna would come out to me with an anxious face, and would ask
every time:


“‘Why is it so long since you have been? Has anything happened?’


“Her eyes, the elegant refined hand she gave me, her indoor dress, the way
she did her hair, her voice, her step, always produced the same impression
on me of something new and extraordinary in my life, and very important.
We talked together for hours, were silent, thinking each our own thoughts,
or she played for hours to me on the piano. If there were no one at home I
stayed and waited, talked to the nurse, played with the child, or lay on
the sofa in the study and read; and when Anna Alexyevna came back I met
her in the hall, took all her parcels from her, and for some reason I
carried those parcels every time with as much love, with as much
solemnity, as a boy.


“There is a proverb that if a peasant woman has no troubles she will buy a
pig. The Luganovitchs had no troubles, so they made friends with me. If I
did not come to the town I must be ill or something must have happened to
me, and both of them were extremely anxious. They were worried that I, an
educated man with a knowledge of languages, should, instead of devoting
myself to science or literary work, live in the country, rush round like a
squirrel in a rage, work hard with never a penny to show for it. They
fancied that I was unhappy, and that I only talked, laughed, and ate to
conceal my sufferings, and even at cheerful moments when I felt happy I
was aware of their searching eyes fixed upon me. They were particularly
touching when I really was depressed, when I was being worried by some
creditor or had not money enough to pay interest on the proper day. The
two of them, husband and wife, would whisper together at the window; then
he would come to me and say with a grave face:


“‘If you really are in need of money at the moment, Pavel
Konstantinovitch, my wife and I beg you not to hesitate to borrow from
us.’


“And he would blush to his ears with emotion. And it would happen that,
after whispering in the same way at the window, he would come up to me,
with red ears, and say:


“‘My wife and I earnestly beg you to accept this present.’


“And he would give me studs, a cigar-case, or a lamp, and I would send
them game, butter, and flowers from the country. They both, by the way,
had considerable means of their own. In early days I often borrowed money,
and was not very particular about it—borrowed wherever I could—but
nothing in the world would have induced me to borrow from the
Luganovitchs. But why talk of it?


“I was unhappy. At home, in the fields, in the barn, I thought of her; I
tried to understand the mystery of a beautiful, intelligent young woman’s
marrying some one so uninteresting, almost an old man (her husband was
over forty), and having children by him; to understand the mystery of this
uninteresting, good, simple-hearted man, who argued with such wearisome
good sense, at balls and evening parties kept near the more solid people,
looking listless and superfluous, with a submissive, uninterested
expression, as though he had been brought there for sale, who yet believed
in his right to be happy, to have children by her; and I kept trying to
understand why she had met him first and not me, and why such a terrible
mistake in our lives need have happened.


“And when I went to the town I saw every time from her eyes that she was
expecting me, and she would confess to me herself that she had had a
peculiar feeling all that day and had guessed that I should come. We
talked a long time, and were silent, yet we did not confess our love to
each other, but timidly and jealously concealed it. We were afraid of
everything that might reveal our secret to ourselves. I loved her
tenderly, deeply, but I reflected and kept asking myself what our love
could lead to if we had not the strength to fight against it. It seemed to
be incredible that my gentle, sad love could all at once coarsely break up
the even tenor of the life of her husband, her children, and all the
household in which I was so loved and trusted. Would it be honourable? She
would go away with me, but where? Where could I take her? It would have
been a different matter if I had had a beautiful, interesting life—if,
for instance, I had been struggling for the emancipation of my country, or
had been a celebrated man of science, an artist or a painter; but as it
was it would mean taking her from one everyday humdrum life to another as
humdrum or perhaps more so. And how long would our happiness last? What
would happen to her in case I was ill, in case I died, or if we simply
grew cold to one another?


“And she apparently reasoned in the same way. She thought of her husband,
her children, and of her mother, who loved the husband like a son. If she
abandoned herself to her feelings she would have to lie, or else to tell
the truth, and in her position either would have been equally terrible and
inconvenient. And she was tormented by the question whether her love would
bring me happiness—would she not complicate my life, which, as it
was, was hard enough and full of all sorts of trouble? She fancied she was
not young enough for me, that she was not industrious nor energetic enough
to begin a new life, and she often talked to her husband of the importance
of my marrying a girl of intelligence and merit who would be a capable
housewife and a help to me—and she would immediately add that it
would be difficult to find such a girl in the whole town.


“Meanwhile the years were passing. Anna Alexyevna already had two
children. When I arrived at the Luganovitchs’ the servants smiled
cordially, the children shouted that Uncle Pavel Konstantinovitch had
come, and hung on my neck; every one was overjoyed. They did not
understand what was passing in my soul, and thought that I, too, was
happy. Every one looked on me as a noble being. And grown-ups and children
alike felt that a noble being was walking about their rooms, and that gave
a peculiar charm to their manner towards me, as though in my presence
their life, too, was purer and more beautiful. Anna Alexyevna and I used
to go to the theatre together, always walking there; we used to sit side
by side in the stalls, our shoulders touching. I would take the
opera-glass from her hands without a word, and feel at that minute that
she was near me, that she was mine, that we could not live without each
other; but by some strange misunderstanding, when we came out of the
theatre we always said good-bye and parted as though we were strangers.
Goodness knows what people were saying about us in the town already, but
there was not a word of truth in it all!


“In the latter years Anna Alexyevna took to going away for frequent visits
to her mother or to her sister; she began to suffer from low spirits, she
began to recognize that her life was spoilt and unsatisfied, and at times
she did not care to see her husband nor her children. She was already
being treated for neurasthenia.


“We were silent and still silent, and in the presence of outsiders she
displayed a strange irritation in regard to me; whatever I talked about,
she disagreed with me, and if I had an argument she sided with my
opponent. If I dropped anything, she would say coldly:


“‘I congratulate you.’


“If I forgot to take the opera-glass when we were going to the theatre,
she would say afterwards:


“‘I knew you would forget it.’


“Luckily or unluckily, there is nothing in our lives that does not end
sooner or later. The time of parting came, as Luganovitch was appointed
president in one of the western provinces. They had to sell their
furniture, their horses, their summer villa. When they drove out to the
villa, and afterwards looked back as they were going away, to look for the
last time at the garden, at the green roof, every one was sad, and I
realized that I had to say goodbye not only to the villa. It was arranged
that at the end of August we should see Anna Alexyevna off to the Crimea,
where the doctors were sending her, and that a little later Luganovitch
and the children would set off for the western province.


“We were a great crowd to see Anna Alexyevna off. When she had said
good-bye to her husband and her children and there was only a minute left
before the third bell, I ran into her compartment to put a basket, which
she had almost forgotten, on the rack, and I had to say good-bye. When our
eyes met in the compartment our spiritual fortitude deserted us both; I
took her in my arms, she pressed her face to my breast, and tears flowed
from her eyes. Kissing her face, her shoulders, her hands wet with tears—oh,
how unhappy we were!—I confessed my love for her, and with a burning
pain in my heart I realized how unnecessary, how petty, and how deceptive
all that had hindered us from loving was. I understood that when you love
you must either, in your reasonings about that love, start from what is
highest, from what is more important than happiness or unhappiness, sin or
virtue in their accepted meaning, or you must not reason at all.


“I kissed her for the last time, pressed her hand, and parted for ever.
The train had already started. I went into the next compartment—it
was empty—and until I reached the next station I sat there crying.
Then I walked home to Sofino....”


While Alehin was telling his story, the rain left off and the sun came
out. Burkin and Ivan Ivanovitch went out on the balcony, from which there
was a beautiful view over the garden and the mill-pond, which was shining
now in the sunshine like a mirror. They admired it, and at the same time
they were sorry that this man with the kind, clever eyes, who had told
them this story with such genuine feeling, should be rushing round and
round this huge estate like a squirrel on a wheel instead of devoting
himself to science or something else which would have made his life more
pleasant; and they thought what a sorrowful face Anna Alexyevna must have
had when he said good-bye to her in the railway-carriage and kissed her
face and shoulders. Both of them had met her in the town, and Burkin knew
her and thought her beautiful.








THE LOTTERY TICKET

IVAN DMITRITCH, a middle-class man who lived with his family on an income
of twelve hundred a year and was very well satisfied with his lot, sat
down on the sofa after supper and began reading the newspaper.


“I forgot to look at the newspaper today,” his wife said to him as she
cleared the table. “Look and see whether the list of drawings is there.”


“Yes, it is,” said Ivan Dmitritch; “but hasn’t your ticket lapsed?”


“No; I took the interest on Tuesday.”


“What is the number?”


“Series 9,499, number 26.”


“All right... we will look... 9,499 and 26.”


Ivan Dmitritch had no faith in lottery luck, and would not, as a rule,
have consented to look at the lists of winning numbers, but now, as he had
nothing else to do and as the newspaper was before his eyes, he passed his
finger downwards along the column of numbers. And immediately, as though
in mockery of his scepticism, no further than the second line from the
top, his eye was caught by the figure 9,499! Unable to believe his eyes,
he hurriedly dropped the paper on his knees without looking to see the
number of the ticket, and, just as though some one had given him a douche
of cold water, he felt an agreeable chill in the pit of the stomach;
tingling and terrible and sweet!


“Masha, 9,499 is there!” he said in a hollow voice.


His wife looked at his astonished and panic-stricken face, and realized
that he was not joking.


“9,499?” she asked, turning pale and dropping the folded tablecloth on the
table.


“Yes, yes... it really is there!”


“And the number of the ticket?”


“Oh, yes! There’s the number of the ticket too. But stay... wait! No, I
say! Anyway, the number of our series is there! Anyway, you
understand....”


Looking at his wife, Ivan Dmitritch gave a broad, senseless smile, like a
baby when a bright object is shown it. His wife smiled too; it was as
pleasant to her as to him that he only mentioned the series, and did not
try to find out the number of the winning ticket. To torment and tantalize
oneself with hopes of possible fortune is so sweet, so thrilling!


“It is our series,” said Ivan Dmitritch, after a long silence. “So there
is a probability that we have won. It’s only a probability, but there it
is!”


“Well, now look!”


“Wait a little. We have plenty of time to be disappointed. It’s on the
second line from the top, so the prize is seventy-five thousand. That’s
not money, but power, capital! And in a minute I shall look at the list,
and there—26! Eh? I say, what if we really have won?”


The husband and wife began laughing and staring at one another in silence.
The possibility of winning bewildered them; they could not have said,
could not have dreamed, what they both needed that seventy-five thousand
for, what they would buy, where they would go. They thought only of the
figures 9,499 and 75,000 and pictured them in their imagination, while
somehow they could not think of the happiness itself which was so
possible.


Ivan Dmitritch, holding the paper in his hand, walked several times from
corner to corner, and only when he had recovered from the first impression
began dreaming a little.


“And if we have won,” he said—“why, it will be a new life, it will
be a transformation! The ticket is yours, but if it were mine I should,
first of all, of course, spend twenty-five thousand on real property in
the shape of an estate; ten thousand on immediate expenses, new
furnishing... travelling... paying debts, and so on.... The other forty
thousand I would put in the bank and get interest on it.”


“Yes, an estate, that would be nice,” said his wife, sitting down and
dropping her hands in her lap.


“Somewhere in the Tula or Oryol provinces.... In the first place we
shouldn’t need a summer villa, and besides, it would always bring in an
income.”


And pictures came crowding on his imagination, each more gracious and
poetical than the last. And in all these pictures he saw himself well-fed,
serene, healthy, felt warm, even hot! Here, after eating a summer soup,
cold as ice, he lay on his back on the burning sand close to a stream or
in the garden under a lime-tree.... It is hot.... His little boy and girl
are crawling about near him, digging in the sand or catching ladybirds in
the grass. He dozes sweetly, thinking of nothing, and feeling all over
that he need not go to the office today, tomorrow, or the day after. Or,
tired of lying still, he goes to the hayfield, or to the forest for
mushrooms, or watches the peasants catching fish with a net. When the sun
sets he takes a towel and soap and saunters to the bathing-shed, where he
undresses at his leisure, slowly rubs his bare chest with his hands, and
goes into the water. And in the water, near the opaque soapy circles,
little fish flit to and fro and green water-weeds nod their heads. After
bathing there is tea with cream and milk rolls.... In the evening a walk
or vint with the neighbours.


“Yes, it would be nice to buy an estate,” said his wife, also dreaming,
and from her face it was evident that she was enchanted by her thoughts.


Ivan Dmitritch pictured to himself autumn with its rains, its cold
evenings, and its St. Martin’s summer. At that season he would have to
take longer walks about the garden and beside the river, so as to get
thoroughly chilled, and then drink a big glass of vodka and eat a salted
mushroom or a soused cucumber, and then—drink another.... The
children would come running from the kitchen-garden, bringing a carrot and
a radish smelling of fresh earth.... And then, he would lie stretched full
length on the sofa, and in leisurely fashion turn over the pages of some
illustrated magazine, or, covering his face with it and unbuttoning his
waistcoat, give himself up to slumber.


The St. Martin’s summer is followed by cloudy, gloomy weather. It rains
day and night, the bare trees weep, the wind is damp and cold. The dogs,
the horses, the fowls—all are wet, depressed, downcast. There is
nowhere to walk; one can’t go out for days together; one has to pace up
and down the room, looking despondently at the grey window. It is dreary!


Ivan Dmitritch stopped and looked at his wife.


“I should go abroad, you know, Masha,” he said.


And he began thinking how nice it would be in late autumn to go abroad
somewhere to the South of France... to Italy.... to India!


“I should certainly go abroad too,” his wife said. “But look at the number
of the ticket!”


“Wait, wait!...”


He walked about the room and went on thinking. It occurred to him: what if
his wife really did go abroad? It is pleasant to travel alone, or in the
society of light, careless women who live in the present, and not such as
think and talk all the journey about nothing but their children, sigh, and
tremble with dismay over every farthing. Ivan Dmitritch imagined his wife
in the train with a multitude of parcels, baskets, and bags; she would be
sighing over something, complaining that the train made her head ache,
that she had spent so much money.... At the stations he would continually
be having to run for boiling water, bread and butter.... She wouldn’t have
dinner because of its being too dear....


“She would begrudge me every farthing,” he thought, with a glance at his
wife. “The lottery ticket is hers, not mine! Besides, what is the use of
her going abroad? What does she want there? She would shut herself up in
the hotel, and not let me out of her sight.... I know!”


And for the first time in his life his mind dwelt on the fact that his
wife had grown elderly and plain, and that she was saturated through and
through with the smell of cooking, while he was still young, fresh, and
healthy, and might well have got married again.


“Of course, all that is silly nonsense,” he thought; “but... why should
she go abroad? What would she make of it? And yet she would go, of
course.... I can fancy... In reality it is all one to her, whether it is
Naples or Klin. She would only be in my way. I should be dependent upon
her. I can fancy how, like a regular woman, she will lock the money up as
soon as she gets it.... She will hide it from me.... She will look after
her relations and grudge me every farthing.”


Ivan Dmitritch thought of her relations. All those wretched brothers and
sisters and aunts and uncles would come crawling about as soon as they
heard of the winning ticket, would begin whining like beggars, and fawning
upon them with oily, hypocritical smiles. Wretched, detestable people! If
they were given anything, they would ask for more; while if they were
refused, they would swear at them, slander them, and wish them every kind
of misfortune.


Ivan Dmitritch remembered his own relations, and their faces, at which he
had looked impartially in the past, struck him now as repulsive and
hateful.


“They are such reptiles!” he thought.


And his wife’s face, too, struck him as repulsive and hateful. Anger
surged up in his heart against her, and he thought malignantly:


“She knows nothing about money, and so she is stingy. If she won it she
would give me a hundred roubles, and put the rest away under lock and
key.”


And he looked at his wife, not with a smile now, but with hatred. She
glanced at him too, and also with hatred and anger. She had her own
daydreams, her own plans, her own reflections; she understood perfectly
well what her husband’s dreams were. She knew who would be the first to
try and grab her winnings.


“It’s very nice making daydreams at other people’s expense!” is what her
eyes expressed. “No, don’t you dare!”


Her husband understood her look; hatred began stirring again in his
breast, and in order to annoy his wife he glanced quickly, to spite her at
the fourth page on the newspaper and read out triumphantly:


“Series 9,499, number 46! Not 26!”


Hatred and hope both disappeared at once, and it began immediately to seem
to Ivan Dmitritch and his wife that their rooms were dark and small and
low-pitched, that the supper they had been eating was not doing them good,
but lying heavy on their stomachs, that the evenings were long and
wearisome....


“What the devil’s the meaning of it?” said Ivan Dmitritch, beginning to be
ill-humoured. “Wherever one steps there are bits of paper under one’s
feet, crumbs, husks. The rooms are never swept! One is simply forced to go
out. Damnation take my soul entirely! I shall go and hang myself on the
first aspen-tree!”


 

The Witch and Other Stories

 



  


THE WITCH

IT was approaching nightfall. The sexton, Savely Gykin, was lying in his
huge bed in the hut adjoining the church. He was not asleep, though it was
his habit to go to sleep at the same time as the hens. His coarse red hair
peeped from under one end of the greasy patchwork quilt, made up of
coloured rags, while his big unwashed feet stuck out from the other. He
was listening. His hut adjoined the wall that encircled the church and the
solitary window in it looked out upon the open country. And out there a
regular battle was going on. It was hard to say who was being wiped off
the face of the earth, and for the sake of whose destruction nature was
being churned up into such a ferment; but, judging from the unceasing
malignant roar, someone was getting it very hot. A victorious force was in
full chase over the fields, storming in the forest and on the church roof,
battering spitefully with its fists upon the windows, raging and tearing,
while something vanquished was howling and wailing.... A plaintive lament
sobbed at the window, on the roof, or in the stove. It sounded not like a
call for help, but like a cry of misery, a consciousness that it was too
late, that there was no salvation. The snowdrifts were covered with a thin
coating of ice; tears quivered on them and on the trees; a dark slush of
mud and melting snow flowed along the roads and paths. In short, it was
thawing, but through the dark night the heavens failed to see it, and
flung flakes of fresh snow upon the melting earth at a terrific rate. And
the wind staggered like a drunkard. It would not let the snow settle on
the ground, and whirled it round in the darkness at random.


Savely listened to all this din and frowned. The fact was that he knew, or
at any rate suspected, what all this racket outside the window was tending
to and whose handiwork it was.


“I know!” he muttered, shaking his finger menacingly under the bedclothes;
“I know all about it.”


On a stool by the window sat the sexton’s wife, Raissa Nilovna. A tin lamp
standing on another stool, as though timid and distrustful of its powers,
shed a dim and flickering light on her broad shoulders, on the handsome,
tempting-looking contours of her person, and on her thick plait, which
reached to the floor. She was making sacks out of coarse hempen stuff. Her
hands moved nimbly, while her whole body, her eyes, her eyebrows, her full
lips, her white neck were as still as though they were asleep, absorbed in
the monotonous, mechanical toil. Only from time to time she raised her
head to rest her weary neck, glanced for a moment towards the window,
beyond which the snowstorm was raging, and bent again over her sacking. No
desire, no joy, no grief, nothing was expressed by her handsome face with
its turned-up nose and its dimples. So a beautiful fountain expresses
nothing when it is not playing.


But at last she had finished a sack. She flung it aside, and, stretching
luxuriously, rested her motionless, lack-lustre eyes on the window. The
panes were swimming with drops like tears, and white with short-lived
snowflakes which fell on the window, glanced at Raissa, and melted....


“Come to bed!” growled the sexton. Raissa remained mute. But suddenly her
eyelashes flickered and there was a gleam of attention in her eye. Savely,
all the time watching her expression from under the quilt, put out his
head and asked:


“What is it?”


“Nothing.... I fancy someone’s coming,” she answered quietly.


The sexton flung the quilt off with his arms and legs, knelt up in bed,
and looked blankly at his wife. The timid light of the lamp illuminated
his hirsute, pock-marked countenance and glided over his rough matted
hair.


“Do you hear?” asked his wife.


Through the monotonous roar of the storm he caught a scarcely audible thin
and jingling monotone like the shrill note of a gnat when it wants to
settle on one’s cheek and is angry at being prevented.


“It’s the post,” muttered Savely, squatting on his heels.


Two miles from the church ran the posting road. In windy weather, when the
wind was blowing from the road to the church, the inmates of the hut
caught the sound of bells.


“Lord! fancy people wanting to drive about in such weather,” sighed
Raissa.


“It’s government work. You’ve to go whether you like or not.”


The murmur hung in the air and died away.


“It has driven by,” said Savely, getting into bed.


But before he had time to cover himself up with the bedclothes he heard a
distinct sound of the bell. The sexton looked anxiously at his wife, leapt
out of bed and walked, waddling, to and fro by the stove. The bell went on
ringing for a little, then died away again as though it had ceased.


“I don’t hear it,” said the sexton, stopping and looking at his wife with
his eyes screwed up.


But at that moment the wind rapped on the window and with it floated a
shrill jingling note. Savely turned pale, cleared his throat, and flopped
about the floor with his bare feet again.


“The postman is lost in the storm,” he wheezed out glancing malignantly at
his wife. “Do you hear? The postman has lost his way!... I... I know! Do
you suppose I... don’t understand?” he muttered. “I know all about it,
curse you!”


“What do you know?” Raissa asked quietly, keeping her eyes fixed on the
window.


“I know that it’s all your doing, you she-devil! Your doing, damn you!
This snowstorm and the post going wrong, you’ve done it all—you!”


“You’re mad, you silly,” his wife answered calmly.


“I’ve been watching you for a long time past and I’ve seen it. From the
first day I married you I noticed that you’d bitch’s blood in you!”


“Tfoo!” said Raissa, surprised, shrugging her shoulders and crossing
herself. “Cross yourself, you fool!”


“A witch is a witch,” Savely pronounced in a hollow, tearful voice,
hurriedly blowing his nose on the hem of his shirt; “though you are my
wife, though you are of a clerical family, I’d say what you are even at
confession.... Why, God have mercy upon us! Last year on the Eve of the
Prophet Daniel and the Three Young Men there was a snowstorm, and what
happened then? The mechanic came in to warm himself. Then on St. Alexey’s
Day the ice broke on the river and the district policeman turned up, and
he was chatting with you all night... the damned brute! And when he came
out in the morning and I looked at him, he had rings under his eyes and
his cheeks were hollow! Eh? During the August fast there were two storms
and each time the huntsman turned up. I saw it all, damn him! Oh, she is
redder than a crab now, aha!”


“You didn’t see anything.”


“Didn’t I! And this winter before Christmas on the Day of the Ten Martyrs
of Crete, when the storm lasted for a whole day and night—do you
remember?—the marshal’s clerk was lost, and turned up here, the
hound.... Tfoo! To be tempted by the clerk! It was worth upsetting God’s
weather for him! A drivelling scribbler, not a foot from the ground,
pimples all over his mug and his neck awry! If he were good-looking,
anyway—but he, tfoo! he is as ugly as Satan!”


The sexton took breath, wiped his lips and listened. The bell was not to
be heard, but the wind banged on the roof, and again there came a tinkle
in the darkness.


“And it’s the same thing now!” Savely went on. “It’s not for nothing the
postman is lost! Blast my eyes if the postman isn’t looking for you! Oh,
the devil is a good hand at his work; he is a fine one to help! He will
turn him round and round and bring him here. I know, I see! You can’t
conceal it, you devil’s bauble, you heathen wanton! As soon as the storm
began I knew what you were up to.”


“Here’s a fool!” smiled his wife. “Why, do you suppose, you thick-head,
that I make the storm?”


“H’m!... Grin away! Whether it’s your doing or not, I only know that when
your blood’s on fire there’s sure to be bad weather, and when there’s bad
weather there’s bound to be some crazy fellow turning up here. It happens
so every time! So it must be you!”


To be more impressive the sexton put his finger to his forehead, closed
his left eye, and said in a singsong voice:


“Oh, the madness! oh, the unclean Judas! If you really are a human being
and not a witch, you ought to think what if he is not the mechanic, or the
clerk, or the huntsman, but the devil in their form! Ah! You’d better
think of that!”


“Why, you are stupid, Savely,” said his wife, looking at him
compassionately. “When father was alive and living here, all sorts of
people used to come to him to be cured of the ague: from the village, and
the hamlets, and the Armenian settlement. They came almost every day, and
no one called them devils. But if anyone once a year comes in bad weather
to warm himself, you wonder at it, you silly, and take all sorts of
notions into your head at once.”


His wife’s logic touched Savely. He stood with his bare feet wide apart,
bent his head, and pondered. He was not firmly convinced yet of the truth
of his suspicions, and his wife’s genuine and unconcerned tone quite
disconcerted him. Yet after a moment’s thought he wagged his head and
said:


“It’s not as though they were old men or bandy-legged cripples; it’s
always young men who want to come for the night.... Why is that? And if
they only wanted to warm themselves——But they are up to
mischief. No, woman; there’s no creature in this world as cunning as your
female sort! Of real brains you’ve not an ounce, less than a starling, but
for devilish slyness—oo-oo-oo! The Queen of Heaven protect us! There
is the postman’s bell! When the storm was only beginning I knew all that
was in your mind. That’s your witchery, you spider!”


“Why do you keep on at me, you heathen?” His wife lost her patience at
last. “Why do you keep sticking to it like pitch?”


“I stick to it because if anything—God forbid—happens
to-night... do you hear?... if anything happens to-night, I’ll go straight
off to-morrow morning to Father Nikodim and tell him all about it. ‘Father
Nikodim,’ I shall say, ‘graciously excuse me, but she is a witch.’ ‘Why
so?’ ‘H’m! do you want to know why?’ ‘Certainly....’ And I shall tell him.
And woe to you, woman! Not only at the dread Seat of Judgment, but in your
earthly life you’ll be punished, too! It’s not for nothing there are
prayers in the breviary against your kind!”


Suddenly there was a knock at the window, so loud and unusual that Savely
turned pale and almost dropped backwards with fright. His wife jumped up,
and she, too, turned pale.


“For God’s sake, let us come in and get warm!” they heard in a trembling
deep bass. “Who lives here? For mercy’s sake! We’ve lost our way.”


“Who are you?” asked Raissa, afraid to look at the window.


“The post,” answered a second voice.


“You’ve succeeded with your devil’s tricks,” said Savely with a wave of
his hand. “No mistake; I am right! Well, you’d better look out!”


The sexton jumped on to the bed in two skips, stretched himself on the
feather mattress, and sniffing angrily, turned with his face to the wall.
Soon he felt a draught of cold air on his back. The door creaked and the
tall figure of a man, plastered over with snow from head to foot, appeared
in the doorway. Behind him could be seen a second figure as white.


“Am I to bring in the bags?” asked the second in a hoarse bass voice.


“You can’t leave them there.” Saying this, the first figure began untying
his hood, but gave it up, and pulling it off impatiently with his cap,
angrily flung it near the stove. Then taking off his greatcoat, he threw
that down beside it, and, without saying good-evening, began pacing up and
down the hut.


He was a fair-haired, young postman wearing a shabby uniform and black
rusty-looking high boots. After warming himself by walking to and fro, he
sat down at the table, stretched out his muddy feet towards the sacks and
leaned his chin on his fist. His pale face, reddened in places by the
cold, still bore vivid traces of the pain and terror he had just been
through. Though distorted by anger and bearing traces of recent suffering,
physical and moral, it was handsome in spite of the melting snow on the
eyebrows, moustaches, and short beard.


“It’s a dog’s life!” muttered the postman, looking round the walls and
seeming hardly able to believe that he was in the warmth. “We were nearly
lost! If it had not been for your light, I don’t know what would have
happened. Goodness only knows when it will all be over! There’s no end to
this dog’s life! Where have we come?” he asked, dropping his voice and
raising his eyes to the sexton’s wife.


“To the Gulyaevsky Hill on General Kalinovsky’s estate,” she answered,
startled and blushing.


“Do you hear, Stepan?” The postman turned to the driver, who was wedged in
the doorway with a huge mail-bag on his shoulders. “We’ve got to
Gulyaevsky Hill.”


“Yes... we’re a long way out.” Jerking out these words like a hoarse sigh,
the driver went out and soon after returned with another bag, then went
out once more and this time brought the postman’s sword on a big belt, of
the pattern of that long flat blade with which Judith is portrayed by the
bedside of Holofernes in cheap woodcuts. Laying the bags along the wall,
he went out into the outer room, sat down there and lighted his pipe.


“Perhaps you’d like some tea after your journey?” Raissa inquired.


“How can we sit drinking tea?” said the postman, frowning. “We must make
haste and get warm, and then set off, or we shall be late for the mail
train. We’ll stay ten minutes and then get on our way. Only be so good as
to show us the way.”


“What an infliction it is, this weather!” sighed Raissa.


“H’m, yes.... Who may you be?”


“We? We live here, by the church.... We belong to the clergy.... There
lies my husband. Savely, get up and say good-evening! This used to be a
separate parish till eighteen months ago. Of course, when the gentry lived
here there were more people, and it was worth while to have the services.
But now the gentry have gone, and I need not tell you there’s nothing for
the clergy to live on. The nearest village is Markovka, and that’s over
three miles away. Savely is on the retired list now, and has got the
watchman’s job; he has to look after the church....”


And the postman was immediately informed that if Savely were to go to the
General’s lady and ask her for a letter to the bishop, he would be given a
good berth. “But he doesn’t go to the General’s lady because he is lazy
and afraid of people. We belong to the clergy all the same...” added
Raissa.


“What do you live on?” asked the postman.


“There’s a kitchen garden and a meadow belonging to the church. Only we
don’t get much from that,” sighed Raissa. “The old skinflint, Father
Nikodim, from the next village celebrates here on St. Nicolas’ Day in the
winter and on St. Nicolas’ Day in the summer, and for that he takes almost
all the crops for himself. There’s no one to stick up for us!”


“You are lying,” Savely growled hoarsely. “Father Nikodim is a saintly
soul, a luminary of the Church; and if he does take it, it’s the
regulation!”


“You’ve a cross one!” said the postman, with a grin. “Have you been
married long?”


“It was three years ago the last Sunday before Lent. My father was sexton
here in the old days, and when the time came for him to die, he went to
the Consistory and asked them to send some unmarried man to marry me that
I might keep the place. So I married him.”


“Aha, so you killed two birds with one stone!” said the postman, looking
at Savely’s back. “Got wife and job together.”


Savely wriggled his leg impatiently and moved closer to the wall. The
postman moved away from the table, stretched, and sat down on the
mail-bag. After a moment’s thought he squeezed the bags with his hands,
shifted his sword to the other side, and lay down with one foot touching
the floor.


“It’s a dog’s life,” he muttered, putting his hands behind his head and
closing his eyes. “I wouldn’t wish a wild Tatar such a life.”


Soon everything was still. Nothing was audible except the sniffing of
Savely and the slow, even breathing of the sleeping postman, who uttered a
deep prolonged “h-h-h” at every breath. From time to time there was a
sound like a creaking wheel in his throat, and his twitching foot rustled
against the bag.


Savely fidgeted under the quilt and looked round slowly. His wife was
sitting on the stool, and with her hands pressed against her cheeks was
gazing at the postman’s face. Her face was immovable, like the face of
some one frightened and astonished.


“Well, what are you gaping at?” Savely whispered angrily.


“What is it to you? Lie down!” answered his wife without taking her eyes
off the flaxen head.


Savely angrily puffed all the air out of his chest and turned abruptly to
the wall. Three minutes later he turned over restlessly again, knelt up on
the bed, and with his hands on the pillow looked askance at his wife. She
was still sitting motionless, staring at the visitor. Her cheeks were pale
and her eyes were glowing with a strange fire. The sexton cleared his
throat, crawled on his stomach off the bed, and going up to the postman,
put a handkerchief over his face.


“What’s that for?” asked his wife.


“To keep the light out of his eyes.”


“Then put out the light!”


Savely looked distrustfully at his wife, put out his lips towards the
lamp, but at once thought better of it and clasped his hands.


“Isn’t that devilish cunning?” he exclaimed. “Ah! Is there any creature
slyer than womenkind?”


“Ah, you long-skirted devil!” hissed his wife, frowning with vexation.
“You wait a bit!”


And settling herself more comfortably, she stared at the postman again.


It did not matter to her that his face was covered. She was not so much
interested in his face as in his whole appearance, in the novelty of this
man. His chest was broad and powerful, his hands were slender and well
formed, and his graceful, muscular legs were much comelier than Savely’s
stumps. There could be no comparison, in fact.


“Though I am a long-skirted devil,” Savely said after a brief interval,
“they’ve no business to sleep here.... It’s government work; we shall have
to answer for keeping them. If you carry the letters, carry them, you
can’t go to sleep.... Hey! you!” Savely shouted into the outer room. “You,
driver. What’s your name? Shall I show you the way? Get up; postmen
mustn’t sleep!”


And Savely, thoroughly roused, ran up to the postman and tugged him by the
sleeve.


“Hey, your honour, if you must go, go; and if you don’t, it’s not the
thing.... Sleeping won’t do.”


The postman jumped up, sat down, looked with blank eyes round the hut, and
lay down again.


“But when are you going?” Savely pattered away. “That’s what the post is
for—to get there in good time, do you hear? I’ll take you.”


The postman opened his eyes. Warmed and relaxed by his first sweet sleep,
and not yet quite awake, he saw as through a mist the white neck and the
immovable, alluring eyes of the sexton’s wife. He closed his eyes and
smiled as though he had been dreaming it all.


“Come, how can you go in such weather!” he heard a soft feminine voice;
“you ought to have a sound sleep and it would do you good!”


“And what about the post?” said Savely anxiously. “Who’s going to take the
post? Are you going to take it, pray, you?”


The postman opened his eyes again, looked at the play of the dimples on
Raissa’s face, remembered where he was, and understood Savely. The thought
that he had to go out into the cold darkness sent a chill shudder all down
him, and he winced.


“I might sleep another five minutes,” he said, yawning. “I shall be late,
anyway....”


“We might be just in time,” came a voice from the outer room. “All days
are not alike; the train may be late for a bit of luck.”


The postman got up, and stretching lazily began putting on his coat.


Savely positively neighed with delight when he saw his visitors were
getting ready to go.


“Give us a hand,” the driver shouted to him as he lifted up a mail-bag.


The sexton ran out and helped him drag the post-bags into the yard. The
postman began undoing the knot in his hood. The sexton’s wife gazed into
his eyes, and seemed trying to look right into his soul.


“You ought to have a cup of tea...” she said.


“I wouldn’t say no... but, you see, they’re getting ready,” he assented.
“We are late, anyway.”


“Do stay,” she whispered, dropping her eyes and touching him by the
sleeve.


The postman got the knot undone at last and flung the hood over his elbow,
hesitating. He felt it comfortable standing by Raissa.


“What a... neck you’ve got!...” And he touched her neck with two fingers.
Seeing that she did not resist, he stroked her neck and shoulders.


“I say, you are...”


“You’d better stay... have some tea.”


“Where are you putting it?” The driver’s voice could be heard outside.
“Lay it crossways.”


“You’d better stay.... Hark how the wind howls.”


And the postman, not yet quite awake, not yet quite able to shake off the
intoxicating sleep of youth and fatigue, was suddenly overwhelmed by a
desire for the sake of which mail-bags, postal trains... and all things in
the world, are forgotten. He glanced at the door in a frightened way, as
though he wanted to escape or hide himself, seized Raissa round the waist,
and was just bending over the lamp to put out the light, when he heard the
tramp of boots in the outer room, and the driver appeared in the doorway.
Savely peeped in over his shoulder. The postman dropped his hands quickly
and stood still as though irresolute.


“It’s all ready,” said the driver. The postman stood still for a moment,
resolutely threw up his head as though waking up completely, and followed
the driver out. Raissa was left alone.


“Come, get in and show us the way!” she heard.


One bell sounded languidly, then another, and the jingling notes in a long
delicate chain floated away from the hut.


When little by little they had died away, Raissa got up and nervously
paced to and fro. At first she was pale, then she flushed all over. Her
face was contorted with hate, her breathing was tremulous, her eyes
gleamed with wild, savage anger, and, pacing up and down as in a cage, she
looked like a tigress menaced with red-hot iron. For a moment she stood
still and looked at her abode. Almost half of the room was filled up by
the bed, which stretched the length of the whole wall and consisted of a
dirty feather-bed, coarse grey pillows, a quilt, and nameless rags of
various sorts. The bed was a shapeless ugly mass which suggested the shock
of hair that always stood up on Savely’s head whenever it occurred to him
to oil it. From the bed to the door that led into the cold outer room
stretched the dark stove surrounded by pots and hanging clouts.
Everything, including the absent Savely himself, was dirty, greasy, and
smutty to the last degree, so that it was strange to see a woman’s white
neck and delicate skin in such surroundings.


Raissa ran up to the bed, stretched out her hands as though she wanted to
fling it all about, stamp it underfoot, and tear it to shreds. But then,
as though frightened by contact with the dirt, she leapt back and began
pacing up and down again.


When Savely returned two hours later, worn out and covered with snow, she
was undressed and in bed. Her eyes were closed, but from the slight tremor
that ran over her face he guessed that she was not asleep. On his way home
he had vowed inwardly to wait till next day and not to touch her, but he
could not resist a biting taunt at her.


“Your witchery was all in vain: he’s gone off,” he said, grinning with
malignant joy.


His wife remained mute, but her chin quivered. Savely undressed slowly,
clambered over his wife, and lay down next to the wall.


“To-morrow I’ll let Father Nikodim know what sort of wife you are!” he
muttered, curling himself up.


Raissa turned her face to him and her eyes gleamed.


“The job’s enough for you, and you can look for a wife in the forest,
blast you!” she said. “I am no wife for you, a clumsy lout, a slug-a-bed,
God forgive me!”


“Come, come... go to sleep!”


“How miserable I am!” sobbed his wife. “If it weren’t for you, I might
have married a merchant or some gentleman! If it weren’t for you, I should
love my husband now! And you haven’t been buried in the snow, you haven’t
been frozen on the highroad, you Herod!”


Raissa cried for a long time. At last she drew a deep sigh and was still.
The storm still raged without. Something wailed in the stove, in the
chimney, outside the walls, and it seemed to Savely that the wailing was
within him, in his ears. This evening had completely confirmed him in his
suspicions about his wife. He no longer doubted that his wife, with the
aid of the Evil One, controlled the winds and the post sledges. But to add
to his grief, this mysteriousness, this supernatural, weird power gave the
woman beside him a peculiar, incomprehensible charm of which he had not
been conscious before. The fact that in his stupidity he unconsciously
threw a poetic glamour over her made her seem, as it were, whiter,
sleeker, more unapproachable.


“Witch!” he muttered indignantly. “Tfoo, horrid creature!”


Yet, waiting till she was quiet and began breathing evenly, he touched her
head with his finger... held her thick plait in his hand for a minute. She
did not feel it. Then he grew bolder and stroked her neck.


“Leave off!” she shouted, and prodded him on the nose with her elbow with
such violence that he saw stars before his eyes.


The pain in his nose was soon over, but the torture in his heart remained.








PEASANT WIVES

IN the village of Reybuzh, just facing the church, stands a two-storeyed
house with a stone foundation and an iron roof. In the lower storey the
owner himself, Filip Ivanov Kashin, nicknamed Dyudya, lives with his
family, and on the upper floor, where it is apt to be very hot in summer
and very cold in winter, they put up government officials, merchants, or
landowners, who chance to be travelling that way. Dyudya rents some bits
of land, keeps a tavern on the highroad, does a trade in tar, honey,
cattle, and jackdaws, and has already something like eight thousand
roubles put by in the bank in the town.


His elder son, Fyodor, is head engineer in the factory, and, as the
peasants say of him, he has risen so high in the world that he is quite
out of reach now. Fyodor’s wife, Sofya, a plain, ailing woman, lives at
home at her father-in-law’s. She is for ever crying, and every Sunday she
goes over to the hospital for medicine. Dyudya’s second son, the hunchback
Alyoshka, is living at home at his father’s. He has only lately been
married to Varvara, whom they singled out for him from a poor family. She
is a handsome young woman, smart and buxom. When officials or merchants
put up at the house, they always insist on having Varvara to bring in the
samovar and make their beds.


One June evening when the sun was setting and the air was full of the
smell of hay, of steaming dung-heaps and new milk, a plain-looking cart
drove into Dyudya’s yard with three people in it: a man of about thirty in
a canvas suit, beside him a little boy of seven or eight in a long black
coat with big bone buttons, and on the driver’s seat a young fellow in a
red shirt.


The young fellow took out the horses and led them out into the street to
walk them up and down a bit, while the traveller washed, said a prayer,
turning towards the church, then spread a rug near the cart and sat down
with the boy to supper. He ate without haste, sedately, and Dyudya, who
had seen a good many travellers in his time, knew him from his manners for
a businesslike man, serious and aware of his own value.


Dyudya was sitting on the step in his waistcoat without a cap on, waiting
for the visitor to speak first. He was used to hearing all kinds of
stories from the travellers in the evening, and he liked listening to them
before going to bed. His old wife, Afanasyevna, and his daughter-in-law
Sofya, were milking in the cowshed. The other daughter-in-law, Varvara,
was sitting at the open window of the upper storey, eating sunflower
seeds.


“The little chap will be your son, I’m thinking?” Dyudya asked the
traveller.


“No; adopted. An orphan. I took him for my soul’s salvation.”


They got into conversation. The stranger seemed to be a man fond of
talking and ready of speech, and Dyudya learned from him that he was from
the town, was of the tradesman class, and had a house of his own, that his
name was Matvey Savitch, that he was on his way now to look at some
gardens that he was renting from some German colonists, and that the boy’s
name was Kuzka. The evening was hot and close, no one felt inclined for
sleep. When it was getting dark and pale stars began to twinkle here and
there in the sky, Matvey Savitch began to tell how he had come by Kuzka.
Afanasyevna and Sofya stood a little way off, listening. Kuzka had gone to
the gate.


“It’s a complicated story, old man,” began Matvey Savitch, “and if I were
to tell you all just as it happened, it would take all night and more. Ten
years ago in a little house in our street, next door to me, where now
there’s a tallow and oil factory, there was living an old widow, Marfa
Semyonovna Kapluntsev, and she had two sons: one was a guard on the
railway, but the other, Vasya, who was just my own age, lived at home with
his mother. Old Kapluntsev had kept five pair of horses and sent carriers
all over the town; his widow had not given up the business, but managed
the carriers as well as her husband had done, so that some days they would
bring in as much as five roubles from their rounds.


“The young fellow, too, made a trifle on his own account. He used to breed
fancy pigeons and sell them to fanciers; at times he would stand for hours
on the roof, waving a broom in the air and whistling; his pigeons were
right up in the clouds, but it wasn’t enough for him, and he’d want them
to go higher yet. Siskins and starlings, too, he used to catch, and he
made cages for sale. All trifles, but, mind you, he’d pick up some ten
roubles a month over such trifles. Well, as time went on, the old lady
lost the use of her legs and took to her bed. In consequence of which
event the house was left without a woman to look after it, and that’s for
all the world like a man without an eye. The old lady bestirred herself
and made up her mind to marry Vasya. They called in a matchmaker at once,
the women got to talking of one thing and another, and Vasya went off to
have a look at the girls. He picked out Mashenka, a widow’s daughter. They
made up their minds without loss of time and in a week it was all settled.
The girl was a little slip of a thing, seventeen, but fair-skinned and
pretty-looking, and like a lady in all her ways; and a decent dowry with
her, five hundred roubles, a cow, a bed.... Well, the old lady—it
seemed as though she had known it was coming—three days after the
wedding, departed to the Heavenly Jerusalem where is neither sickness nor
sighing. The young people gave her a good funeral and began their life
together. For just six months they got on splendidly, and then all of a
sudden another misfortune. It never rains but it pours: Vasya was summoned
to the recruiting office to draw lots for the service. He was taken, poor
chap, for a soldier, and not even granted exemption. They shaved his head
and packed him off to Poland. It was God’s will; there was nothing to be
done. When he said good-bye to his wife in the yard, he bore it all right;
but as he glanced up at the hay-loft and his pigeons for the last time, he
burst out crying. It was pitiful to see him.


“At first Mashenka got her mother to stay with her, that she mightn’t be
dull all alone; she stayed till the baby—this very Kuzka here—was
born, and then she went off to Oboyan to another married daughter’s and
left Mashenka alone with the baby. There were five peasants—the
carriers—a drunken saucy lot; horses, too, and dray-carts to see to,
and then the fence would be broken or the soot afire in the chimney—jobs
beyond a woman, and through our being neighbours, she got into the way of
turning to me for every little thing.... Well, I’d go over, set things to
rights, and give advice.... Naturally, not without going indoors, drinking
a cup of tea and having a little chat with her. I was a young fellow,
intellectual, and fond of talking on all sorts of subjects; she, too, was
well-bred and educated. She was always neatly dressed, and in summer she
walked out with a sunshade. Sometimes I would begin upon religion or
politics with her, and she was flattered and would entertain me with tea
and jam.... In a word, not to make a long story of it, I must tell you,
old man, a year had not passed before the Evil One, the enemy of all
mankind, confounded me. I began to notice that any day I didn’t go to see
her, I seemed out of sorts and dull. And I’d be continually making up
something that I must see her about: ‘It’s high time,’ I’d say to myself,
‘to put the double windows in for the winter,’ and the whole day I’d idle
away over at her place putting in the windows and take good care to leave
a couple of them over for the next day too.


“‘I ought to count over Vasya’s pigeons, to see none of them have
strayed,’ and so on. I used always to be talking to her across the fence,
and in the end I made a little gate in the fence so as not to have to go
so far round. From womankind comes much evil into the world and every kind
of abomination. Not we sinners only; even the saints themselves have been
led astray by them. Mashenka did not try to keep me at a distance. Instead
of thinking of her husband and being on her guard, she fell in love with
me. I began to notice that she was dull without me, and was always walking
to and fro by the fence looking into my yard through the cracks.


“My brains were going round in my head in a sort of frenzy. On Thursday in
Holy Week I was going early in the morning—it was scarcely light—to
market. I passed close by her gate, and the Evil One was by me—at my
elbow. I looked—she had a gate with open trellis work at the top—and
there she was, up already, standing in the middle of the yard, feeding the
ducks. I could not restrain myself, and I called her name. She came up and
looked at me through the trellis.... Her little face was white, her eyes
soft and sleepy-looking.... I liked her looks immensely, and I began
paying her compliments, as though we were not at the gate, but just as one
does on namedays, while she blushed, and laughed, and kept looking
straight into my eyes without winking.... I lost all sense and began to
declare my love to her.... She opened the gate, and from that morning we
began to live as man and wife....”


The hunchback Alyoshka came into the yard from the street and ran out of
breath into the house, not looking at any one. A minute later he ran out
of the house with a concertina. Jingling some coppers in his pocket, and
cracking sunflower seeds as he ran, he went out at the gate.


“And who’s that, pray?” asked Matvey Savitch.


“My son Alexey,” answered Dyudya. “He’s off on a spree, the rascal. God
has afflicted him with a hump, so we are not very hard on him.”


“And he’s always drinking with the other fellows, always drinking,” sighed
Afanasyevna. “Before Carnival we married him, thinking he’d be steadier,
but there! he’s worse than ever.”


“It’s been no use. Simply keeping another man’s daughter for nothing,”
said Dyudya.


Somewhere behind the church they began to sing a glorious, mournful song.
The words they could not catch and only the voices could be heard—two
tenors and a bass. All were listening; there was complete stillness in the
yard.... Two voices suddenly broke off with a loud roar of laughter, but
the third, a tenor, still sang on, and took so high a note that every one
instinctively looked upwards, as though the voice had soared to heaven
itself.


Varvara came out of the house, and screening her eyes with her hand, as
though from the sun, she looked towards the church.


“It’s the priest’s sons with the schoolmaster,” she said.


Again all the three voices began to sing together. Matvey Savitch sighed
and went on:


“Well, that’s how it was, old man. Two years later we got a letter from
Vasya from Warsaw. He wrote that he was being sent home sick. He was ill.
By that time I had put all that foolishness out of my head, and I had a
fine match picked out all ready for me, only I didn’t know how to break it
off with my sweetheart. Every day I’d make up my mind to have it out with
Mashenka, but I didn’t know how to approach her so as not to have a
woman’s screeching about my ears. The letter freed my hands. I read it
through with Mashenka; she turned white as a sheet, while I said to her:
‘Thank God; now,’ says I, ‘you’ll be a married woman again.’ But says she:
‘I’m not going to live with him.’ ‘Why, isn’t he your husband?’ said I.
‘Is it an easy thing?... I never loved him and I married him not of my own
free will. My mother made me.’ ‘Don’t try to get out of it, silly,’ said
I, ‘but tell me this: were you married to him in church or not?’ ‘I was
married,’ she said, ‘but it’s you that I love, and I will stay with you to
the day of my death. Folks may jeer. I don’t care....’ ‘You’re a Christian
woman,’ said I, ‘and have read the Scriptures; what is written there?’


“Once married, with her husband she must live,” said Dyudya.


“‘Man and wife are one flesh. We have sinned,’ I said, ‘you and I, and it
is enough; we must repent and fear God. We must confess it all to Vasya,’
said I; ‘he’s a quiet fellow and soft—he won’t kill you. And
indeed,’ said I, ‘better to suffer torments in this world at the hands of
your lawful master than to gnash your teeth at the dread Seat of
Judgment.’ The wench wouldn’t listen; she stuck to her silly, ‘It’s you I
love!’ and nothing more could I get out of her.


“Vasya came back on the Saturday before Trinity, early in the morning.
From my fence I could see everything; he ran into the house, and came back
a minute later with Kuzka in his arms, and he was laughing and crying all
at once; he was kissing Kuzka and looking up at the hay-loft, and hadn’t
the heart to put the child down, and yet he was longing to go to his
pigeons. He was always a soft sort of chap—sentimental. That day
passed off very well, all quiet and proper. They had begun ringing the
church bells for the evening service, when the thought struck me:
‘To-morrow’s Trinity Sunday; how is it they are not decking the gates and
the fence with green? Something’s wrong,’ I thought. I went over to them.
I peeped in, and there he was, sitting on the floor in the middle of the
room, his eyes staring like a drunken man’s, the tears streaming down his
cheeks and his hands shaking; he was pulling cracknels, necklaces,
gingerbread nuts, and all sorts of little presents out of his bundle and
flinging them on the floor. Kuzka—he was three years old—was
crawling on the floor, munching the gingerbreads, while Mashenka stood by
the stove, white and shivering all over, muttering: ‘I’m not your wife; I
can’t live with you,’ and all sorts of foolishness. I bowed down at
Vasya’s feet, and said: ‘We have sinned against you, Vassily Maximitch;
forgive us, for Christ’s sake!’ Then I got up and spoke to Mashenka: ‘You,
Marya Semyonovna, ought now to wash Vassily Maximitch’s feet and drink the
water. Do you be an obedient wife to him, and pray to God for me, that He
in His mercy may forgive my transgression.’ It came to me like an
inspiration from an angel of Heaven; I gave her solemn counsel and spoke
with such feeling that my own tears flowed too. And so two days later
Vasya comes to me: ‘Matyusha,’ says he, ‘I forgive you and my wife; God
have mercy on you! She was a soldier’s wife, a young thing all alone; it
was hard for her to be on her guard. She’s not the first, nor will she be
the last. Only,’ he says, ‘I beg you to behave as though there had never
been anything between you, and to make no sign, while I,’ says he, ‘will
do my best to please her in every way, so that she may come to love me
again.’ He gave me his hand on it, drank a cup of tea, and went away more
cheerful.


“‘Well,’ thought I, ‘thank God!’ and I did feel glad that everything had
gone off so well. But no sooner had Vasya gone out of the yard, when in
came Mashenka. Ah! What I had to suffer! She hung on my neck, weeping and
praying: ‘For God’s sake, don’t cast me off; I can’t live without you!’”


“The vile hussy!” sighed Dyudya.


“I swore at her, stamped my foot, and dragging her into the passage, I
fastened the door with the hook. ‘Go to your husband,’ I cried. ‘Don’t
shame me before folks. Fear God!’ And every day there was a scene of that
sort.


“One morning I was standing in my yard near the stable cleaning a bridle.
All at once I saw her running through the little gate into my yard, with
bare feet, in her petticoat, and straight towards me; she clutched at the
bridle, getting all smeared with the pitch, and shaking and weeping, she
cried: ‘I can’t stand him; I loathe him; I can’t bear it! If you don’t
love me, better kill me!’ I was angry, and I struck her twice with the
bridle, but at that instant Vasya ran in at the gate, and in a despairing
voice he shouted: ‘Don’t beat her! Don’t beat her!’ But he ran up himself,
and waving his arms, as though he were mad, he let fly with his fists at
her with all his might, then flung her on the ground and kicked her. I
tried to defend her, but he snatched up the reins and thrashed her with
them, and all the while, like a colt’s whinny, he went: ‘He—he—he!’”


“I’d take the reins and let you feel them,” muttered Varvara, moving away;
“murdering our sister, the damned brutes!...”


“Hold your tongue, you jade!” Dyudya shouted at her.


“‘He—he—he!’” Matvey Savitch went on. “A carrier ran out of
his yard; I called to my workman, and the three of us got Mashenka away
from him and carried her home in our arms. The disgrace of it! The same
day I went over in the evening to see how things were. She was lying in
bed, all wrapped up in bandages, nothing but her eyes and nose to be seen;
she was looking at the ceiling. I said: ‘Good-evening, Marya Semyonovna!’
She did not speak. And Vasya was sitting in the next room, his head in his
hands, crying and saying: ‘Brute that I am! I’ve ruined my life! O God,
let me die!’ I sat for half an hour by Mashenka and gave her a good
talking-to. I tried to frighten her a bit. ‘The righteous,’ said I, ‘after
this life go to Paradise, but you will go to a Gehenna of fire, like all
adulteresses. Don’t strive against your husband, go and lay yourself at
his feet.’ But never a word from her; she didn’t so much as bJlink an
eyelid, for all the world as though I were talking to a post. The next day
Vasya fell ill with something like cholera, and in the evening I heard
that he was dead. Well, so they buried him, and Mashenka did not go to the
funeral; she didn’t care to show her shameless face and her bruises. And
soon there began to be talk all over the district that Vasya had not died
a natural death, that Mashenka had made away with him. It got to the ears
of the police; they had Vasya dug up and cut open, and in his stomach they
found arsenic. It was clear he had been poisoned; the police came and took
Mashenka away, and with her the innocent Kuzka. They were put in
prison.... The woman had gone too far—God punished her.... Eight
months later they tried her. She sat, I remember, on a low stool, with a
little white kerchief on her head, wearing a grey gown, and she was so
thin, so pale, so sharp-eyed it made one sad to look at her. Behind her
stood a soldier with a gun. She would not confess her guilt. Some in the
court said she had poisoned her husband and others declared he had
poisoned himself for grief. I was one of the witnesses. When they
questioned me, I told the whole truth according to my oath. ‘Hers,’ said
I, ‘is the guilt. It’s no good to conceal it; she did not love her
husband, and she had a will of her own....’ The trial began in the morning
and towards night they passed this sentence: to send her to hard labour in
Siberia for thirteen years. After that sentence Mashenka remained three
months longer in prison. I went to see her, and from Christian charity I
took her a little tea and sugar. But as soon as she set eyes on me she
began to shake all over, wringing her hands and muttering: ‘Go away! go
away!’ And Kuzka she clasped to her as though she were afraid I would take
him away. ‘See,’ said I, ‘what you have come to! Ah, Masha, Masha! you
would not listen to me when I gave you good advice, and now you must
repent it. You are yourself to blame,’ said I; ‘blame yourself!’ I was
giving her good counsel, but she: ‘Go away, go away!’ huddling herself and
Kuzka against the wall, and trembling all over.


“When they were taking her away to the chief town of our province, I
walked by the escort as far as the station and slipped a rouble into her
bundle for my soul’s salvation. But she did not get as far as Siberia....
She fell sick of fever and died in prison.”


“Live like a dog and you must die a dog’s death,” said Dyudya.


“Kuzka was sent back home.... I thought it over and took him to bring up.
After all—though a convict’s child—still he was a living soul,
a Christian.... I was sorry for him. I shall make him my clerk, and if I
have no children of my own, I’ll make a merchant of him. Wherever I go
now, I take him with me; let him learn his work.”


All the while Matvey Savitch had been telling his story, Kuzka had sat on
a little stone near the gate. His head propped in both hands, he gazed at
the sky, and in the distance he looked in the dark like a stump of wood.


“Kuzka, come to bed,” Matvey Savitch bawled to him.


“Yes, it’s time,” said Dyudya, getting up; he yawned loudly and added:


“Folks will go their own way, and that’s what comes of it.”


Over the yard the moon was floating now in the heavens; she was moving one
way, while the clouds beneath moved the other way; the clouds were
disappearing into the darkness, but still the moon could be seen high
above the yard.


Matvey Savitch said a prayer, facing the church, and saying good-night, he
lay down on the ground near his cart. Kuzka, too, said a prayer, lay down
in the cart, and covered himself with his little overcoat; he made himself
a little hole in the hay so as to be more comfortable, and curled up so
that his elbows looked like knees. From the yard Dyudya could be seen
lighting a candle in his room below, putting on his spectacles and
standing in the corner with a book. He was a long while reading and
crossing himself.


The travellers fell asleep. Afanasyevna and Sofya came up to the cart and
began looking at Kuzka.


“The little orphan’s asleep,” said the old woman. “He’s thin and frail,
nothing but bones. No mother and no one to care for him properly.”


“My Grishutka must be two years older,” said Sofya. “Up at the factory he
lives like a slave without his mother. The foreman beats him, I dare say.
When I looked at this poor mite just now, I thought of my own Grishutka,
and my heart went cold within me.”


A minute passed in silence.


“Doesn’t remember his mother, I suppose,” said the old woman.


“How could he remember?”


And big tears began dropping from Sofya’s eyes.


“He’s curled himself up like a cat,” she said, sobbing and laughing with
tenderness and sorrow.... “Poor motherless mite!”


Kuzka started and opened his eyes. He saw before him an ugly, wrinkled,
tear-stained face, and beside it another, aged and toothless, with a sharp
chin and hooked nose, and high above them the infinite sky with the flying
clouds and the moon. He cried out in fright, and Sofya, too, uttered a
cry; both were answered by the echo, and a faint stir passed over the
stifling air; a watchman tapped somewhere near, a dog barked. Matvey
Savitch muttered something in his sleep and turned over on the other side.


Late at night when Dyudya and the old woman and the neighbouring watchman
were all asleep, Sofya went out to the gate and sat down on the bench. She
felt stifled and her head ached from weeping. The street was a wide and
long one; it stretched for nearly two miles to the right and as far to the
left, and the end of it was out of sight. The moon was now not over the
yard, but behind the church. One side of the street was flooded with
moonlight, while the other side lay in black shadow. The long shadows of
the poplars and the starling-cotes stretched right across the street,
while the church cast a broad shadow, black and terrible that enfolded
Dyudya’s gates and half his house. The street was still and deserted. From
time to time the strains of music floated faintly from the end of the
street—Alyoshka, most likely, playing his concertina.


Someone moved in the shadow near the church enclosure, and Sofya could not
make out whether it were a man or a cow, or perhaps merely a big bird
rustling in the trees. But then a figure stepped out of the shadow,
halted, and said something in a man’s voice, then vanished down the
turning by the church. A little later, not three yards from the gate,
another figure came into sight; it walked straight from the church to the
gate and stopped short, seeing Sofya on the bench.


“Varvara, is that you?” said Sofya.


“And if it were?”


It was Varvara. She stood still a minute, then came up to the bench and
sat down.


“Where have you been?” asked Sofya.


Varvara made no answer.


“You’d better mind you don’t get into trouble with such goings-on, my
girl,” said Sofya. “Did you hear how Mashenka was kicked and lashed with
the reins? You’d better look out, or they’ll treat you the same.”


“Well, let them!”


Varvara laughed into her kerchief and whispered:


“I have just been with the priest’s son.”


“Nonsense!”


“I have!”


“It’s a sin!” whispered Sofya.


“Well, let it be.... What do I care? If it’s a sin, then it is a sin, but
better be struck dead by thunder than live like this. I’m young and
strong, and I’ve a filthy crooked hunchback for a husband, worse than
Dyudya himself, curse him! When I was a girl, I hadn’t bread to eat, or a
shoe to my foot, and to get away from that wretchedness I was tempted by
Alyoshka’s money, and got caught like a fish in a net, and I’d rather have
a viper for my bedfellow than that scurvy Alyoshka. And what’s your life?
It makes me sick to look at it. Your Fyodor sent you packing from the
factory and he’s taken up with another woman. They have robbed you of your
boy and made a slave of him. You work like a horse, and never hear a kind
word. I’d rather pine all my days an old maid, I’d rather get half a
rouble from the priest’s son, I’d rather beg my bread, or throw myself
into the well...


“It’s a sin!” whispered Sofya again.


“Well, let it be.”


Somewhere behind the church the same three voices, two tenors and a bass,
began singing again a mournful song. And again the words could not be
distinguished.


“They are not early to bed,” Varvara said, laughing.


And she began telling in a whisper of her midnight walks with the priest’s
son, and of the stories he had told her, and of his comrades, and of the
fun she had with the travellers who stayed in the house. The mournful song
stirred a longing for life and freedom. Sofya began to laugh; she thought
it sinful and terrible and sweet to hear about, and she felt envious and
sorry that she, too, had not been a sinner when she was young and pretty.


In the churchyard they heard twelve strokes beaten on the watchman’s
board.


“It’s time we were asleep,” said Sofya, getting up, “or, maybe, we shall
catch it from Dyudya.”


They both went softly into the yard.


“I went away without hearing what he was telling about Mashenka,” said
Varvara, making herself a bed under the window.


“She died in prison, he said. She poisoned her husband.”


Varvara lay down beside Sofya a while, and said softly:


“I’d make away with my Alyoshka and never regret it.”


“You talk nonsense; God forgive you.”


When Sofya was just dropping asleep, Varvara, coming close, whispered in
her ear:


“Let us get rid of Dyudya and Alyoshka!”


Sofya started and said nothing. Then she opened her eyes and gazed a long
while steadily at the sky.


“People would find out,” she said.


“No, they wouldn’t. Dyudya’s an old man, it’s time he did die; and they’d
say Alyoshka died of drink.”


“I’m afraid... God would chastise us.”


“Well, let Him....”


Both lay awake thinking in silence.


“It’s cold,” said Sofya, beginning to shiver all over. “It will soon be
morning.... Are you asleep?”


“No.... Don’t you mind what I say, dear,” whispered Varvara; “I get so mad
with the damned brutes, I don’t know what I do say. Go to sleep, or it
will be daylight directly.... Go to sleep.”


Both were quiet and soon they fell asleep.


Earlier than all woke the old woman. She waked up Sofya and they went
together into the cowshed to milk the cows. The hunchback Alyoshka came in
hopelessly drunk without his concertina; his breast and knees had been in
the dust and straw—he must have fallen down in the road. Staggering,
he went into the cowshed, and without undressing he rolled into a sledge
and began to snore at once. When first the crosses on the church and then
the windows were flashing in the light of the rising sun, and shadows
stretched across the yard over the dewy grass from the trees and the top
of the well, Matvey Savitch jumped up and began hurrying about:


“Kuzka! get up!” he shouted. “It’s time to put in the horses! Look sharp!”


The bustle of morning was beginning. A young Jewess in a brown gown with
flounces led a horse into the yard to drink. The pulley of the well
creaked plaintively, the bucket knocked as it went down....


Kuzka, sleepy, tired, covered with dew, sat up in the cart, lazily putting
on his little overcoat, and listening to the drip of the water from the
bucket into the well as he shivered with the cold.


“Auntie!” shouted Matvey Savitch to Sofya, “tell my lad to hurry up and to
harness the horses!”


And Dyudya at the same instant shouted from the window:


“Sofya, take a farthing from the Jewess for the horse’s drink! They’re
always in here, the mangy creatures!”


In the street sheep were running up and down, baaing; the peasant women
were shouting at the shepherd, while he played his pipes, cracked his
whip, or answered them in a thick sleepy bass. Three sheep strayed into
the yard, and not finding the gate again, pushed at the fence.


Varvara was waked by the noise, and bundling her bedding up in her arms,
she went into the house.


“You might at least drive the sheep out!” the old woman bawled after her,
“my lady!”


“I dare say! As if I were going to slave for you Herods!” muttered
Varvara, going into the house.


Dyudya came out of the house with his accounts in his hands, sat down on
the step, and began reckoning how much the traveller owed him for the
night’s lodging, oats, and watering his horses.


“You charge pretty heavily for the oats, my good man,” said Matvey
Savitch.


“If it’s too much, don’t take them. There’s no compulsion, merchant.”


When the travellers were ready to start, they were detained for a minute.
Kuzka had lost his cap.


“Little swine, where did you put it?” Matvey Savitch roared angrily.
“Where is it?”


Kuzka’s face was working with terror; he ran up and down near the cart,
and not finding it there, ran to the gate and then to the shed. The old
woman and Sofya helped him look.


“I’ll pull your ears off!” yelled Matvey Savitch. “Dirty brat!”


The cap was found at the bottom of the cart.


Kuzka brushed the hay off it with his sleeve, put it on, and timidly he
crawled into the cart, still with an expression of terror on his face as
though he were afraid of a blow from behind.


Matvey Savitch crossed himself. The driver gave a tug at the reins and the
cart rolled out of the yard.








THE POST

IT was three o’clock in the night. The postman, ready to set off, in his
cap and his coat, with a rusty sword in his hand, was standing near the
door, waiting for the driver to finish putting the mail bags into the cart
which had just been brought round with three horses. The sleepy postmaster
sat at his table, which was like a counter; he was filling up a form and
saying:


“My nephew, the student, wants to go to the station at once. So look here,
Ignatyev, let him get into the mail cart and take him with you to the
station: though it is against the regulations to take people with the
mail, what’s one to do? It’s better for him to drive with you free than
for me to hire horses for him.”


“Ready!” they heard a shout from the yard.


“Well, go then, and God be with you,” said the postmaster. “Which driver
is going?”


“Semyon Glazov.”


“Come, sign the receipt.”


The postman signed the receipt and went out. At the entrance of the
post-office there was the dark outline of a cart and three horses. The
horses were standing still except that one of the tracehorses kept
uneasily shifting from one leg to the other and tossing its head, making
the bell clang from time to time. The cart with the mail bags looked like
a patch of darkness. Two silhouettes were moving lazily beside it: the
student with a portmanteau in his hand and a driver. The latter was
smoking a short pipe; the light of the pipe moved about in the darkness,
dying away and flaring up again; for an instant it lighted up a bit of a
sleeve, then a shaggy moustache and big copper-red nose, then
stern-looking, overhanging eyebrows. The postman pressed down the mail
bags with his hands, laid his sword on them and jumped into the cart. The
student clambered irresolutely in after him, and accidentally touching him
with his elbow, said timidly and politely: “I beg your pardon.”


The pipe went out. The postmaster came out of the post-office just as he
was, in his waistcoat and slippers; shrinking from the night dampness and
clearing his throat, he walked beside the cart and said:


“Well, God speed! Give my love to your mother, Mihailo. Give my love to
them all. And you, Ignatyev, mind you don’t forget to give the parcel to
Bystretsov.... Off!”


The driver took the reins in one hand, blew his nose, and, arranging the
seat under himself, clicked to the horses.


“Give them my love,” the postmaster repeated.


The big bell clanged something to the little bells, the little bells gave
it a friendly answer. The cart squeaked, moved. The big bell lamented, the
little bells laughed. Standing up in his seat the driver lashed the
restless tracehorse twice, and the cart rumbled with a hollow sound along
the dusty road. The little town was asleep. Houses and trees stood black
on each side of the broad street, and not a light was to be seen. Narrow
clouds stretched here and there over the star-spangled sky, and where the
dawn would soon be coming there was a narrow crescent moon; but neither
the stars, of which there were many, nor the half-moon, which looked
white, lighted up the night air. It was cold and damp, and there was a
smell of autumn.


The student, who thought that politeness required him to talk affably to a
man who had not refused to let him accompany him, began:


“In summer it would be light at this time, but now there is not even a
sign of the dawn. Summer is over!”


The student looked at the sky and went on:


“Even from the sky one can see that it is autumn. Look to the right. Do
you see three stars side by side in a straight line? That is the
constellation of Orion, which, in our hemisphere, only becomes visible in
September.”


The postman, thrusting his hands into his sleeves and retreating up to his
ears into his coat collar, did not stir and did not glance at the sky.
Apparently the constellation of Orion did not interest him. He was
accustomed to see the stars, and probably he had long grown weary of them.
The student paused for a while and then said:


“It’s cold! It’s time for the dawn to begin. Do you know what time the sun
rises?”


“What?”


“What time does the sun rise now?”


“Between five and six,” said the driver.


The mail cart drove out of the town. Now nothing could be seen on either
side of the road but the fences of kitchen gardens and here and there a
solitary willow-tree; everything in front of them was shrouded in
darkness. Here in the open country the half-moon looked bigger and the
stars shone more brightly. Then came a scent of dampness; the postman
shrank further into his collar, the student felt an unpleasant chill first
creeping about his feet, then over the mail bags, over his hands and his
face. The horses moved more slowly; the bell was mute as though it were
frozen. There was the sound of the splash of water, and stars reflected in
the water danced under the horses’ feet and round the wheels.


But ten minutes later it became so dark that neither the stars nor the
moon could be seen. The mail cart had entered the forest. Prickly pine
branches were continually hitting the student on his cap and a spider’s
web settled on his face. Wheels and hoofs knocked against huge roots, and
the mail cart swayed from side to side as though it were drunk.


“Keep to the road,” said the postman angrily. “Why do you run up the edge?
My face is scratched all over by the twigs! Keep more to the right!”


But at that point there was nearly an accident. The cart suddenly bounded
as though in the throes of a convulsion, began trembling, and, with a
creak, lurched heavily first to the right and then to the left, and at a
fearful pace dashed along the forest track. The horses had taken fright at
something and bolted.


“Wo! wo!” the driver cried in alarm. “Wo... you devils!”


The student, violently shaken, bent forward and tried to find something to
catch hold of so as to keep his balance and save himself from being thrown
out, but the leather mail bags were slippery, and the driver, whose belt
the student tried to catch at, was himself tossed up and down and seemed
every moment on the point of flying out. Through the rattle of the wheels
and the creaking of the cart they heard the sword fall with a clank on the
ground, then a little later something fell with two heavy thuds behind the
mail cart.


“Wo!” the driver cried in a piercing voice, bending backwards. “Stop!”


The student fell on his face and bruised his forehead against the driver’s
seat, but was at once tossed back again and knocked his spine violently
against the back of the cart.


“I am falling!” was the thought that flashed through his mind, but at that
instant the horses dashed out of the forest into the open, turned sharply
to the right, and rumbling over a bridge of logs, suddenly stopped dead,
and the suddenness of this halt flung the student forward again.


The driver and the student were both breathless. The postman was not in
the cart. He had been thrown out, together with his sword, the student’s
portmanteau, and one of the mail bags.


“Stop, you rascal! Sto-op!” they heard him shout from the forest. “You
damned blackguard!” he shouted, running up to the cart, and there was a
note of pain and fury in his tearful voice. “You anathema, plague take
you!” he roared, dashing up to the driver and shaking his fist at him.


“What a to-do! Lord have mercy on us!” muttered the driver in a
conscience-stricken voice, setting right something in the harness at the
horses’ heads. “It’s all that devil of a tracehorse. Cursed filly; it is
only a week since she has run in harness. She goes all right, but as soon
as we go down hill there is trouble! She wants a touch or two on the nose,
then she wouldn’t play about like this... Stea-eady! Damn!”


While the driver was setting the horses to rights and looking for the
portmanteau, the mail bag, and the sword on the road, the postman in a
plaintive voice shrill with anger ejaculated oaths. After replacing the
luggage the driver for no reason whatever led the horses for a hundred
paces, grumbled at the restless tracehorse, and jumped up on the box.


When his fright was over the student felt amused and good-humoured. It was
the first time in his life that he had driven by night in a mail cart, and
the shaking he had just been through, the postman’s having been thrown
out, and the pain in his own back struck him as interesting adventures. He
lighted a cigarette and said with a laugh:


“Why you know, you might break your neck like that! I very nearly flew
out, and I didn’t even notice you had been thrown out. I can fancy what it
is like driving in autumn!”


The postman did not speak.


“Have you been going with the post for long?” the student asked.


“Eleven years.”


“Oho; every day?”


“Yes, every day. I take this post and drive back again at once. Why?”


Making the journey every day, he must have had a good many interesting
adventures in eleven years. On bright summer and gloomy autumn nights, or
in winter when a ferocious snowstorm whirled howling round the mail cart,
it must have been hard to avoid feeling frightened and uncanny. No doubt
more than once the horses had bolted, the mail cart had stuck in the mud,
they had been attacked by highwaymen, or had lost their way in the
blizzard....


“I can fancy what adventures you must have had in eleven years!” said the
student. “I expect it must be terrible driving?”


He said this and expected that the postman would tell him something, but
the latter preserved a sullen silence and retreated into his collar.
Meanwhile it began to get light. The sky changed colour imperceptibly; it
still seemed dark, but by now the horses and the driver and the road could
be seen. The crescent moon looked bigger and bigger, and the cloud that
stretched below it, shaped like a cannon in a gun-carriage, showed a faint
yellow on its lower edge. Soon the postman’s face was visible. It was wet
with dew, grey and rigid as the face of a corpse. An expression of dull,
sullen anger was set upon it, as though the postman were still in pain and
still angry with the driver.


“Thank God it is daylight!” said the student, looking at his chilled and
angry face. “I am quite frozen. The nights are cold in September, but as
soon as the sun rises it isn’t cold. Shall we soon reach the station?”


The postman frowned and made a wry face.


“How fond you are of talking, upon my word!” he said. “Can’t you keep
quiet when you are travelling?”


The student was confused, and did not approach him again all the journey.
The morning came on rapidly. The moon turned pale and melted away into the
dull grey sky, the cloud turned yellow all over, the stars grew dim, but
the east was still cold-looking and the same colour as the rest of the
sky, so that one could hardly believe the sun was hidden in it.


The chill of the morning and the surliness of the postman gradually
infected the student. He looked apathetically at the country around him,
waited for the warmth of the sun, and thought of nothing but how dreadful
and horrible it must be for the poor trees and the grass to endure the
cold nights. The sun rose dim, drowsy, and cold. The tree-tops were not
gilded by the rays of the rising sun, as usually described, the sunbeams
did not creep over the earth and there was no sign of joy in the flight of
the sleepy birds. The cold remained just the same now that the sun was up
as it had been in the night.


The student looked drowsily and ill-humouredly at the curtained windows of
a mansion by which the mail cart drove. Behind those windows, he thought,
people were most likely enjoying their soundest morning sleep not hearing
the bells, nor feeling the cold, nor seeing the postman’s angry face; and
if the bell did wake some young lady, she would turn over on the other
side, smile in the fulness of her warmth and comfort, and, drawing up her
feet and putting her hand under her cheek, would go off to sleep more
soundly than ever.


The student looked at the pond which gleamed near the house and thought of
the carp and the pike which find it possible to live in cold water....


“It’s against the regulations to take anyone with the post....” the
postman said unexpectedly. “It’s not allowed! And since it is not allowed,
people have no business... to get in.... Yes. It makes no difference to
me, it’s true, only I don’t like it, and I don’t wish it.”


“Why didn’t you say so before, if you don’t like it?”


The postman made no answer but still had an unfriendly, angry expression.
When, a little later, the horses stopped at the entrance of the station
the student thanked him and got out of the cart. The mail train had not
yet come in. A long goods train stood in a siding; in the tender the
engine driver and his assistant, with faces wet with dew, were drinking
tea from a dirty tin teapot. The carriages, the platforms, the seats were
all wet and cold. Until the train came in the student stood at the buffet
drinking tea while the postman, with his hands thrust up his sleeves and
the same look of anger still on his face, paced up and down the platform
in solitude, staring at the ground under his feet.


With whom was he angry? Was it with people, with poverty, with the autumn
nights?








THE NEW VILLA


I

Two miles from the village of Obrutchanovo a huge bridge was being built.
From the village, which stood up high on the steep river-bank, its
trellis-like skeleton could be seen, and in foggy weather and on still
winter days, when its delicate iron girders and all the scaffolding around
was covered with hoar frost, it presented a picturesque and even fantastic
spectacle. Kutcherov, the engineer who was building the bridge, a stout,
broad-shouldered, bearded man in a soft crumpled cap drove through the
village in his racing droshky or his open carriage. Now and then on
holidays navvies working on the bridge would come to the village; they
begged for alms, laughed at the women, and sometimes carried off
something. But that was rare; as a rule the days passed quietly and
peacefully as though no bridge-building were going on, and only in the
evening, when camp fires gleamed near the bridge, the wind faintly wafted
the songs of the navvies. And by day there was sometimes the mournful
clang of metal, don-don-don.


It happened that the engineer’s wife came to see him. She was pleased with
the river-banks and the gorgeous view over the green valley with trees,
churches, flocks, and she began begging her husband to buy a small piece
of ground and to build them a cottage on it. Her husband agreed. They
bought sixty acres of land, and on the high bank in a field, where in
earlier days the cows of Obrutchanovo used to wander, they built a pretty
house of two storeys with a terrace and a verandah, with a tower and a
flagstaff on which a flag fluttered on Sundays—they built it in
about three months, and then all the winter they were planting big trees,
and when spring came and everything began to be green there were already
avenues to the new house, a gardener and two labourers in white aprons
were digging near it, there was a little fountain, and a globe of
looking-glass flashed so brilliantly that it was painful to look at. The
house had already been named the New Villa.


On a bright, warm morning at the end of May two horses were brought to
Obrutchanovo to the village blacksmith, Rodion Petrov. They came from the
New Villa. The horses were sleek, graceful beasts, as white as snow, and
strikingly alike.


“Perfect swans!” said Rodion, gazing at them with reverent admiration.


His wife Stepanida, his children and grandchildren came out into the
street to look at them. By degrees a crowd collected. The Lytchkovs,
father and son, both men with swollen faces and entirely beardless, came
up bareheaded. Kozov, a tall, thin old man with a long, narrow beard, came
up leaning on a stick with a crook handle: he kept winking with his crafty
eyes and smiling ironically as though he knew something.


“It’s only that they are white; what is there in them?” he said. “Put mine
on oats, and they will be just as sleek. They ought to be in a plough and
with a whip, too....”


The coachman simply looked at him with disdain, but did not utter a word.
And afterwards, while they were blowing up the fire at the forge, the
coachman talked while he smoked cigarettes. The peasants learned from him
various details: his employers were wealthy people; his mistress, Elena
Ivanovna, had till her marriage lived in Moscow in a poor way as a
governess; she was kind-hearted, compassionate, and fond of helping the
poor. On the new estate, he told them, they were not going to plough or to
sow, but simply to live for their pleasure, live only to breathe the fresh
air. When he had finished and led the horses back a crowd of boys followed
him, the dogs barked, and Kozov, looking after him, winked sarcastically.


“Landowners, too-oo!” he said. “They have built a house and set up horses,
but I bet they are nobodies—landowners, too-oo.”


Kozov for some reason took a dislike from the first to the new house, to
the white horses, and to the handsome, well-fed coachman. Kozov was a
solitary man, a widower; he had a dreary life (he was prevented from
working by a disease which he sometimes called a rupture and sometimes
worms) he was maintained by his son, who worked at a confectioner’s in
Harkov and sent him money; and from early morning till evening he
sauntered at leisure about the river or about the village; if he saw, for
instance, a peasant carting a log, or fishing, he would say: “That log’s
dry wood—it is rotten,” or, “They won’t bite in weather like this.”
In times of drought he would declare that there would not be a drop of
rain till the frost came; and when the rains came he would say that
everything would rot in the fields, that everything was ruined. And as he
said these things he would wink as though he knew something.


At the New Villa they burned Bengal lights and sent up fireworks in the
evenings, and a sailing-boat with red lanterns floated by Obrutchanovo.
One morning the engineer’s wife, Elena Ivanovna, and her little daughter
drove to the village in a carriage with yellow wheels and a pair of dark
bay ponies; both mother and daughter were wearing broad-brimmed straw
hats, bent down over their ears.


This was exactly at the time when they were carting manure, and the
blacksmith Rodion, a tall, gaunt old man, bareheaded and barefooted, was
standing near his dirty and repulsive-looking cart and, flustered, looked
at the ponies, and it was evident by his face that he had never seen such
little horses before.


“The Kutcherov lady has come!” was whispered around. “Look, the Kutcherov
lady has come!”


Elena Ivanovna looked at the huts as though she were selecting one, and
then stopped at the very poorest, at the windows of which there were so
many children’s heads—flaxen, red, and dark. Stepanida, Rodion’s
wife, a stout woman, came running out of the hut; her kerchief slipped off
her grey head; she looked at the carriage facing the sun, and her face
smiled and wrinkled up as though she were blind.


“This is for your children,” said Elena Ivanovna, and she gave her three
roubles.


Stepanida suddenly burst into tears and bowed down to the ground. Rodion,
too, flopped to the ground, displaying his brownish bald head, and as he
did so he almost caught his wife in the ribs with the fork. Elena Ivanovna
was overcome with confusion and drove back.


II


The Lytchkovs, father and son, caught in their meadows two cart-horses, a
pony, and a broad-faced Aalhaus bull-calf, and with the help of red-headed
Volodka, son of the blacksmith Rodion, drove them to the village. They
called the village elder, collected witnesses, and went to look at the
damage.


“All right, let ‘em!” said Kozov, winking, “le-et em! Let them get out of
it if they can, the engineers! Do you think there is no such thing as law?
All right! Send for the police inspector, draw up a statement!...”


“Draw up a statement,” repeated Volodka.


“I don’t want to let this pass!” shouted the younger Lytchkov. He shouted
louder and louder, and his beardless face seemed to be more and more
swollen. “They’ve set up a nice fashion! Leave them free, and they will
ruin all the meadows! You’ve no sort of right to ill-treat people! We are
not serfs now!”


“We are not serfs now!” repeated Volodka.


“We got on all right without a bridge,” said the elder Lytchkov gloomily;
“we did not ask for it. What do we want a bridge for? We don’t want it!”


“Brothers, good Christians, we cannot leave it like this!”


“All right, let ‘em!” said Kozov, winking. “Let them get out of it if they
can! Landowners, indeed!”


They went back to the village, and as they walked the younger Lytchkov
beat himself on the breast with his fist and shouted all the way, and
Volodka shouted, too, repeating his words. And meanwhile quite a crowd had
gathered in the village round the thoroughbred bull-calf and the horses.
The bullcalf was embarrassed and looked up from under his brows, but
suddenly lowered his muzzle to the ground and took to his heels, kicking
up his hind legs; Kozov was frightened and waved his stick at him, and
they all burst out laughing. Then they locked up the beasts and waited.


In the evening the engineer sent five roubles for the damage, and the two
horses, the pony and the bull-calf, without being fed or given water,
returned home, their heads hanging with a guilty air as though they were
convicted criminals.


On getting the five roubles the Lytchkovs, father and son, the village
elder and Volodka, punted over the river in a boat and went to a hamlet on
the other side where there was a tavern, and there had a long carousal.
Their singing and the shouting of the younger Lytchkov could be heard from
the village. Their women were uneasy and did not sleep all night. Rodion
did not sleep either.


“It’s a bad business,” he said, sighing and turning from side to side.
“The gentleman will be angry, and then there will be trouble.... They have
insulted the gentleman.... Oh, they’ve insulted him. It’s a bad
business...”


It happened that the peasants, Rodion amongst them, went into their forest
to divide the clearings for mowing, and as they were returning home they
were met by the engineer. He was wearing a red cotton shirt and high
boots; a setter dog with its long tongue hanging out, followed behind him.


“Good-day, brothers,” he said.


The peasants stopped and took off their hats.


“I have long wanted to have a talk with you, friends,” he went on. “This
is what it is. Ever since the early spring your cattle have been in my
copse and garden every day. Everything is trampled down; the pigs have
rooted up the meadow, are ruining everything in the kitchen garden, and
all the undergrowth in the copse is destroyed. There is no getting on with
your herdsmen; one asks them civilly, and they are rude. Damage is done on
my estate every day and I do nothing—I don’t fine you or make a
complaint; meanwhile you impounded my horses and my bull calf and exacted
five roubles. Was that right? Is that neighbourly?” he went on, and his
face was so soft and persuasive, and his expression was not forbidding.
“Is that the way decent people behave? A week ago one of your people cut
down two oak saplings in my copse. You have dug up the road to Eresnevo,
and now I have to go two miles round. Why do you injure me at every step?
What harm have I done you? For God’s sake, tell me! My wife and I do our
utmost to live with you in peace and harmony; we help the peasants as we
can. My wife is a kind, warm-hearted woman; she never refuses you help.
That is her dream—to be of use to you and your children. You reward
us with evil for our good. You are unjust, my friends. Think of that. I
ask you earnestly to think it over. We treat you humanely; repay us in the
same coin.”


He turned and went away. The peasants stood a little longer, put on their
caps and walked away. Rodion, who always understood everything that was
said to him in some peculiar way of his own, heaved a sigh and said:


“We must pay. ‘Repay in coin, my friends’... he said.”


They walked to the village in silence. On reaching home Rodion said his
prayer, took off his boots, and sat down on the bench beside his wife.
Stepanida and he always sat side by side when they were at home, and
always walked side by side in the street; they ate and they drank and they
slept always together, and the older they grew the more they loved one
another. It was hot and crowded in their hut, and there were children
everywhere—on the floors, in the windows, on the stove.... In spite
of her advanced years Stepanida was still bearing children, and now,
looking at the crowd of children, it was hard to distinguish which were
Rodion’s and which were Volodka’s. Volodka’s wife, Lukerya, a plain young
woman with prominent eyes and a nose like the beak of a bird, was kneading
dough in a tub; Volodka was sitting on the stove with his legs hanging.


“On the road near Nikita’s buckwheat... the engineer with his dog...”
Rodion began, after a rest, scratching his ribs and his elbow. “‘You must
pay,’ says he... ‘coin,’ says he.... Coin or no coin, we shall have to
collect ten kopecks from every hut. We’ve offended the gentleman very
much. I am sorry for him....”


“We’ve lived without a bridge,” said Volodka, not looking at anyone, “and
we don’t want one.”


“What next; the bridge is a government business.”


“We don’t want it.”


“Your opinion is not asked. What is it to you?”


“‘Your opinion is not asked,’” Volodka mimicked him. “We don’t want to
drive anywhere; what do we want with a bridge? If we have to, we can cross
by the boat.”


Someone from the yard outside knocked at the window so violently that it
seemed to shake the whole hut.


“Is Volodka at home?” he heard the voice of the younger Lytchkov.
“Volodka, come out, come along.”


Volodka jumped down off the stove and began looking for his cap.


“Don’t go, Volodka,” said Rodion diffidently. “Don’t go with them, son.
You are foolish, like a little child; they will teach you no good; don’t
go!”


“Don’t go, son,” said Stepanida, and she bJlinked as though about to shed
tears. “I bet they are calling you to the tavern.”


“‘To the tavern,’” Volodka mimicked.


“You’ll come back drunk again, you currish Herod,” said Lukerya, looking
at him angrily. “Go along, go along, and may you burn up with vodka, you
tailless Satan!”


“You hold your tongue,” shouted Volodka.


“They’ve married me to a fool, they’ve ruined me, a luckless orphan, you
red-headed drunkard...” wailed Lukerya, wiping her face with a hand
covered with dough. “I wish I had never set eyes on you.”


Volodka gave her a blow on the ear and went off.


III


Elena Ivanovna and her little daughter visited the village on foot. They
were out for a walk. It was a Sunday, and the peasant women and girls were
walking up and down the street in their brightly-coloured dresses. Rodion
and Stepanida, sitting side by side at their door, bowed and smiled to
Elena Ivanovna and her little daughter as to acquaintances. From the
windows more than a dozen children stared at them; their faces expressed
amazement and curiosity, and they could be heard whispering:


“The Kutcherov lady has come! The Kutcherov lady!”


“Good-morning,” said Elena Ivanovna, and she stopped; she paused, and then
asked: “Well, how are you getting on?”


“We get along all right, thank God,” answered Rodion, speaking rapidly.
“To be sure we get along.”


“The life we lead!” smiled Stepanida. “You can see our poverty yourself,
dear lady! The family is fourteen souls in all, and only two
bread-winners. We are supposed to be blacksmiths, but when they bring us a
horse to shoe we have no coal, nothing to buy it with. We are worried to
death, lady,” she went on, and laughed. “Oh, oh, we are worried to death.”


Elena Ivanovna sat down at the entrance and, putting her arm round her
little girl, pondered something, and judging from the little girl’s
expression, melancholy thoughts were straying through her mind, too; as
she brooded she played with the sumptuous lace on the parasol she had
taken out of her mother’s hands.


“Poverty,” said Rodion, “a great deal of anxiety—you see no end to
it. Here, God sends no rain... our life is not easy, there is no denying
it.”


“You have a hard time in this life,” said Elena Ivanovna, “but in the
other world you will be happy.”


Rodion did not understand her, and simply coughed into his clenched hand
by way of reply. Stepanida said:


“Dear lady, the rich men will be all right in the next world, too. The
rich put up candles, pay for services; the rich give to beggars, but what
can the poor man do? He has no time to make the sign of the cross. He is
the beggar of beggars himself; how can he think of his soul? And many sins
come from poverty; from trouble we snarl at one another like dogs, we
haven’t a good word to say to one another, and all sorts of things happen,
dear lady—God forbid! It seems we have no luck in this world nor the
next. All the luck has fallen to the rich.”


She spoke gaily; she was evidently used to talking of her hard life. And
Rodion smiled, too; he was pleased that his old woman was so clever, so
ready of speech.


“It is only on the surface that the rich seem to be happy,” said Elena
Ivanovna. “Every man has his sorrow. Here my husband and I do not live
poorly, we have means, but are we happy? I am young, but I have had four
children; my children are always being ill. I am ill, too, and constantly
being doctored.”


“And what is your illness?” asked Rodion.


“A woman’s complaint. I get no sleep; a continual headache gives me no
peace. Here I am sitting and talking, but my head is bad, I am weak all
over, and I should prefer the hardest labour to such a condition. My soul,
too, is troubled; I am in continual fear for my children, my husband.
Every family has its own trouble of some sort; we have ours. I am not of
noble birth. My grandfather was a simple peasant, my father was a
tradesman in Moscow; he was a plain, uneducated man, too, while my
husband’s parents were wealthy and distinguished. They did not want him to
marry me, but he disobeyed them, quarrelled with them, and they have not
forgiven us to this day. That worries my husband; it troubles him and
keeps him in constant agitation; he loves his mother, loves her dearly. So
I am uneasy, too, my soul is in pain.”


Peasants, men and women, were by now standing round Rodion’s hut and
listening. Kozov came up, too, and stood twitching his long, narrow beard.
The Lytchkovs, father and son, drew near.


“And say what you like, one cannot be happy and satisfied if one does not
feel in one’s proper place.” Elena Ivanovna went on. “Each of you has his
strip of land, each of you works and knows what he is working for; my
husband builds bridges—in short, everyone has his place, while I, I
simply walk about. I have not my bit to work. I don’t work, and feel as
though I were an outsider. I am saying all this that you may not judge
from outward appearances; if a man is expensively dressed and has means it
does not prove that he is satisfied with his life.”


She got up to go away and took her daughter by the hand.


“I like your place here very much,” she said, and smiled, and from that
faint, diffident smile one could tell how unwell she really was, how young
and how pretty; she had a pale, thinnish face with dark eyebrows and fair
hair. And the little girl was just such another as her mother: thin, fair,
and slender. There was a fragrance of scent about them.


“I like the river and the forest and the village,” Elena Ivanovna went on;
“I could live here all my life, and I feel as though here I should get
strong and find my place. I want to help you—I want to dreadfully—to
be of use, to be a real friend to you. I know your need, and what I don’t
know I feel, my heart guesses. I am sick, feeble, and for me perhaps it is
not possible to change my life as I would. But I have children. I will try
to bring them up that they may be of use to you, may love you. I shall
impress upon them continually that their life does not belong to them, but
to you. Only I beg you earnestly, I beseech you, trust us, live in
friendship with us. My husband is a kind, good man. Don’t worry him, don’t
irritate him. He is sensitive to every trifle, and yesterday, for
instance, your cattle were in our vegetable garden, and one of your people
broke down the fence to the bee-hives, and such an attitude to us drives
my husband to despair. I beg you,” she went on in an imploring voice, and
she clasped her hands on her bosom—“I beg you to treat us as good
neighbours; let us live in peace! There is a saying, you know, that even a
bad peace is better than a good quarrel, and, ‘Don’t buy property, but buy
neighbours.’ I repeat my husband is a kind man and good; if all goes well
we promise to do everything in our power for you; we will mend the roads,
we will build a school for your children. I promise you.”


“Of course we thank you humbly, lady,” said Lytchkov the father, looking
at the ground; “you are educated people; it is for you to know best. Only,
you see, Voronov, a rich peasant at Eresnevo, promised to build a school;
he, too, said, ‘I will do this for you,’ ‘I will do that for you,’ and he
only put up the framework and refused to go on. And then they made the
peasants put the roof on and finish it; it cost them a thousand roubles.
Voronov did not care; he only stroked his beard, but the peasants felt it
a bit hard.”


“That was a crow, but now there’s a rook, too,” said Kozov, and he winked.


There was the sound of laughter.


“We don’t want a school,” said Volodka sullenly. “Our children go to
Petrovskoe, and they can go on going there; we don’t want it.”


Elena Ivanovna seemed suddenly intimidated; her face looked paler and
thinner, she shrank into herself as though she had been touched with
something coarse, and walked away without uttering another word. And she
walked more and more quickly, without looking round.


“Lady,” said Rodion, walking after her, “lady, wait a bit; hear what I
would say to you.”


He followed her without his cap, and spoke softly as though begging.


“Lady, wait and hear what I will say to you.”


They had walked out of the village, and Elena Ivanovna stopped beside a
cart in the shade of an old mountain ash.


“Don’t be offended, lady,” said Rodion. “What does it mean? Have patience.
Have patience for a couple of years. You will live here, you will have
patience, and it will all come round. Our folks are good and peaceable;
there’s no harm in them; it’s God’s truth I’m telling you. Don’t mind
Kozov and the Lytchkovs, and don’t mind Volodka. He’s a fool; he listens
to the first that speaks. The others are quiet folks; they are silent.
Some would be glad, you know, to say a word from the heart and to stand up
for themselves, but cannot. They have a heart and a conscience, but no
tongue. Don’t be offended... have patience.... What does it matter?”


Elena Ivanovna looked at the broad, tranquil river, pondering, and tears
flowed down her cheeks. And Rodion was troubled by those tears; he almost
cried himself.


“Never mind...” he muttered. “Have patience for a couple of years. You can
have the school, you can have the roads, only not all at once. If you
went, let us say, to sow corn on that mound you would first have to weed
it out, to pick out all the stones, and then to plough, and work and
work... and with the people, you see, it is the same... you must work and
work until you overcome them.”


The crowd had moved away from Rodion’s hut, and was coming along the
street towards the mountain ash. They began singing songs and playing the
concertina, and they kept coming closer and closer....


“Mamma, let us go away from here,” said the little girl, huddling up to
her mother, pale and shaking all over; “let us go away, mamma!


“Where?”


“To Moscow.... Let us go, mamma.”


The child began crying.


Rodion was utterly overcome; his face broke into profuse perspiration; he
took out of his pocket a little crooked cucumber, like a half-moon,
covered with crumbs of rye bread, and began thrusting it into the little
girl’s hands.


“Come, come,” he muttered, scowling severely; “take the little cucumber,
eat it up.... You mustn’t cry. Mamma will whip you.... She’ll tell your
father of you when you get home. Come, come....”


They walked on, and he still followed behind them, wanting to say
something friendly and persuasive to them. And seeing that they were both
absorbed in their own thoughts and their own griefs, and not noticing him,
he stopped and, shading his eyes from the sun, looked after them for a
long time till they disappeared into their copse.


IV


The engineer seemed to grow irritable and petty, and in every trivial
incident saw an act of robbery or outrage. His gate was kept bolted even
by day, and at night two watchmen walked up and down the garden beating a
board; and they gave up employing anyone from Obrutchanovo as a labourer.
As ill-luck would have it someone (either a peasant or one of the workmen)
took the new wheels off the cart and replaced them by old ones, then soon
afterwards two bridles and a pair of pincers were carried off, and murmurs
arose even in the village. People began to say that a search should be
made at the Lytchkovs’ and at Volodka’s, and then the bridles and the
pincers were found under the hedge in the engineer’s garden; someone had
thrown them down there.


It happened that the peasants were coming in a crowd out of the forest,
and again they met the engineer on the road. He stopped, and without
wishing them good-day he began, looking angrily first at one, then at
another:


“I have begged you not to gather mushrooms in the park and near the yard,
but to leave them for my wife and children, but your girls come before
daybreak and there is not a mushroom left....Whether one asks you or not
it makes no difference. Entreaties, and friendliness, and persuasion I see
are all useless.”


He fixed his indignant eyes on Rodion and went on:


“My wife and I behaved to you as human beings, as to our equals, and you?
But what’s the use of talking! It will end by our looking down upon you.
There is nothing left!”


And making an effort to restrain his anger, not to say too much, he turned
and went on.


On getting home Rodion said his prayer, took off his boots, and sat down
beside his wife.


“Yes...” he began with a sigh. “We were walking along just now, and Mr.
Kutcherov met us.... Yes.... He saw the girls at daybreak... ‘Why don’t
they bring mushrooms,’... he said ‘to my wife and children?’ he said....
And then he looked at me and he said: ‘I and my wife will look after you,’
he said. I wanted to fall down at his feet, but I hadn’t the courage....
God give him health... God bless him!...”


Stephania crossed herself and sighed.


“They are kind, simple-hearted people,” Rodion went on. “‘We shall look
after you.’... He promised me that before everyone. In our old age... it
wouldn’t be a bad thing.... I should always pray for them.... Holy Mother,
bless them....”


The Feast of the Exaltation of the Cross, the fourteenth of September, was
the festival of the village church. The Lytchkovs, father and son, went
across the river early in the morning and returned to dinner drunk; they
spent a long time going about the village, alternately singing and
swearing; then they had a fight and went to the New Villa to complain.
First Lytchkov the father went into the yard with a long ashen stick in
his hands. He stopped irresolutely and took off his hat. Just at that
moment the engineer and his family were sitting on the verandah, drinking
tea.


“What do you want?” shouted the engineer.


“Your honour...” Lytchkov began, and burst into tears. “Show the Divine
mercy, protect me... my son makes my life a misery... your honour...”


Lytchkov the son walked up, too; he, too, was bareheaded and had a stick
in his hand; he stopped and fixed his drunken senseless eyes on the
verandah.


“It is not my business to settle your affairs,” said the engineer. “Go to
the rural captain or the police officer.”


“I have been everywhere.... I have lodged a petition...” said Lytchkov the
father, and he sobbed. “Where can I go now? He can kill me now, it seems.
He can do anything. Is that the way to treat a father? A father?”


He raised his stick and hit his son on the head; the son raised his stick
and struck his father just on his bald patch such a blow that the stick
bounced back. The father did not even flinch, but hit his son again and
again on the head. And so they stood and kept hitting one another on the
head, and it looked not so much like a fight as some sort of a game. And
peasants, men and women, stood in a crowd at the gate and looked into the
garden, and the faces of all were grave. They were the peasants who had
come to greet them for the holiday, but seeing the Lytchkovs, they were
ashamed and did not go in.


The next morning Elena Ivanovna went with the children to Moscow. And
there was a rumour that the engineer was selling his house....


V


The peasants had long ago grown used to the sight of the bridge, and it
was difficult to imagine the river at that place without a bridge. The
heap of rubble left from the building of it had long been overgrown with
grass, the navvies were forgotten, and instead of the strains of the
“Dubinushka” that they used to sing, the peasants heard almost every hour
the sounds of a passing train.


The New Villa has long ago been sold; now it belongs to a government clerk
who comes here from the town for the holidays with his family, drinks tea
on the terrace, and then goes back to the town again. He wears a cockade
on his cap; he talks and clears his throat as though he were a very
important official, though he is only of the rank of a collegiate
secretary, and when the peasants bow he makes no response.


In Obrutchanovo everyone has grown older; Kozov is dead. In Rodion’s hut
there are even more children. Volodka has grown a long red beard. They are
still as poor as ever.


In the early spring the Obrutchanovo peasants were sawing wood near the
station. And after work they were going home; they walked without haste
one after the other. Broad saws curved over their shoulders; the sun was
reflected in them. The nightingales were singing in the bushes on the
bank, larks were trilling in the heavens. It was quiet at the New Villa;
there was not a soul there, and only golden pigeons—golden because
the sunlight was streaming upon them—were flying over the house. All
of them—Rodion, the two Lytchkovs, and Volodka—thought of the
white horses, the little ponies, the fireworks, the boat with the
lanterns; they remembered how the engineer’s wife, so beautiful and so
grandly dressed, had come into the village and talked to them in such a
friendly way. And it seemed as though all that had never been; it was like
a dream or a fairy-tale.


They trudged along, tired out, and mused as they went.... In their
village, they mused, the people were good, quiet, sensible, fearing God,
and Elena Ivanovna, too, was quiet, kind, and gentle; it made one sad to
look at her, but why had they not got on together? Why had they parted
like enemies? How was it that some mist had shrouded from their eyes what
mattered most, and had let them see nothing but damage done by cattle,
bridles, pincers, and all those trivial things which now, as they
remembered them, seemed so nonsensical? How was it that with the new owner
they lived in peace, and yet had been on bad terms with the engineer?


And not knowing what answer to make to these questions they were all
silent except Volodka, who muttered something.


“What is it?” Rodion asked.


“We lived without a bridge...” said Volodka gloomily. “We lived without a
bridge, and did not ask for one... and we don’t want it....”


No one answered him and they walked on in silence with drooping heads.








DREAMS

Two peasant constables—one a stubby, black-bearded individual with
such exceptionally short legs that if you looked at him from behind it
seemed as though his legs began much lower down than in other people; the
other, long, thin, and straight as a stick, with a scanty beard of dark
reddish colour—were escorting to the district town a tramp who
refused to remember his name. The first waddled along, looking from side
to side, chewing now a straw, now his own sleeve, slapping himself on the
haunches and humming, and altogether had a careless and frivolous air; the
other, in spite of his lean face and narrow shoulders, looked solid,
grave, and substantial; in the lines and expression of his whole figure he
was like the priests among the Old Believers, or the warriors who are
painted on old-fashioned ikons. “For his wisdom God had added to his
forehead”—that is, he was bald—which increased the resemblance
referred to. The first was called Andrey Ptaha, the second Nikandr
Sapozhnikov.


The man they were escorting did not in the least correspond with the
conception everyone has of a tramp. He was a frail little man, weak and
sickly-looking, with small, colourless, and extremely indefinite features.
His eyebrows were scanty, his expression mild and submissive; he had
scarcely a trace of a moustache, though he was over thirty. He walked
along timidly, bent forward, with his hands thrust into his sleeves. The
collar of his shabby cloth overcoat, which did not look like a peasant’s,
was turned up to the very brim of his cap, so that only his little red
nose ventured to peep out into the light of day. He spoke in an
ingratiating tenor, continually coughing. It was very, very difficult to
believe that he was a tramp concealing his surname. He was more like an
unsuccessful priest’s son, stricken by God and reduced to beggary; a clerk
discharged for drunkenness; a merchant’s son or nephew who had tried his
feeble powers in a theatrical career, and was now going home to play the
last act in the parable of the prodigal son; perhaps, judging by the dull
patience with which he struggled with the hopeless autumn mud, he might
have been a fanatical monk, wandering from one Russian monastery to
another, continually seeking “a peaceful life, free from sin,” and not
finding it....


The travellers had been a long while on their way, but they seemed to be
always on the same small patch of ground. In front of them there stretched
thirty feet of muddy black-brown mud, behind them the same, and wherever
one looked further, an impenetrable wall of white fog. They went on and
on, but the ground remained the same, the wall was no nearer, and the
patch on which they walked seemed still the same patch. They got a glimpse
of a white, clumsy-looking stone, a small ravine, or a bundle of hay
dropped by a passer-by, the brief glimmer of a great muddy puddle, or,
suddenly, a shadow with vague outlines would come into view ahead of them;
the nearer they got to it the smaller and darker it became; nearer still,
and there stood up before the wayfarers a slanting milestone with the
number rubbed off, or a wretched birch-tree drenched and bare like a
wayside beggar. The birch-tree would whisper something with what remained
of its yellow leaves, one leaf would break off and float lazily to the
ground.... And then again fog, mud, the brown grass at the edges of the
road. On the grass hung dingy, unfriendly tears. They were not the tears
of soft joy such as the earth weeps at welcoming the summer sun and
parting from it, and such as she gives to drink at dawn to the corncrakes,
quails, and graceful, long-beaked crested snipes. The travellers’ feet
stuck in the heavy, clinging mud. Every step cost an effort.


Andrey Ptaha was somewhat excited. He kept looking round at the tramp and
trying to understand how a live, sober man could fail to remember his
name.


“You are an orthodox Christian, aren’t you?” he asked.


“Yes,” the tramp answered mildly.


“H’m... then you’ve been christened?”


“Why, to be sure! I’m not a Turk. I go to church and to the sacrament, and
do not eat meat when it is forbidden. And I observe my religious duties
punctually....”


“Well, what are you called, then?”


“Call me what you like, good man.”


Ptaha shrugged his shoulders and slapped himself on the haunches in
extreme perplexity. The other constable, Nikandr Sapozhnikov, maintained a
staid silence. He was not so naive as Ptaha, and apparently knew very well
the reasons which might induce an orthodox Christian to conceal his name
from other people. His expressive face was cold and stern. He walked apart
and did not condescend to idle chatter with his companions, but, as it
were, tried to show everyone, even the fog, his sedateness and discretion.


“God knows what to make of you,” Ptaha persisted in addressing the tramp.
“Peasant you are not, and gentleman you are not, but some sort of a thing
between.... The other day I was washing a sieve in the pond and caught a
reptile—see, as long as a finger, with gills and a tail. The first
minute I thought it was a fish, then I looked—and, blow it! if it
hadn’t paws. It was not a fish, it was a viper, and the deuce only knows
what it was.... So that’s like you.... What’s your calling?”


“I am a peasant and of peasant family,” sighed the tramp. “My mamma was a
house serf. I don’t look like a peasant, that’s true, for such has been my
lot, good man. My mamma was a nurse with the gentry, and had every
comfort, and as I was of her flesh and blood, I lived with her in the
master’s house. She petted and spoiled me, and did her best to take me out
of my humble class and make a gentleman of me. I slept in a bed, every day
I ate a real dinner, I wore breeches and shoes like a gentleman’s child.
What my mamma ate I was fed on, too; they gave her stuffs as a present,
and she dressed me up in them.... We lived well! I ate so many sweets and
cakes in my childish years that if they could be sold now it would be
enough to buy a good horse. Mamma taught me to read and write, she
instilled the fear of God in me from my earliest years, and she so trained
me that now I can’t bring myself to utter an unrefined peasant word. And I
don’t drink vodka, my lad, and am neat in my dress, and know how to behave
with decorum in good society. If she is still living, God give her health;
and if she is dead, then, O Lord, give her soul peace in Thy Kingdom,
wherein the just are at rest.”


The tramp bared his head with the scanty hair standing up like a brush on
it, turned his eyes upward and crossed himself twice.


“Grant her, O Lord, a verdant and peaceful resting-place,” he said in a
drawling voice, more like an old woman’s than a man’s. “Teach Thy servant
Xenia Thy justifications, O Lord! If it had not been for my beloved mamma
I should have been a peasant with no sort of understanding! Now, young
man, ask me about anything and I understand it all: the holy Scriptures
and profane writings, and every prayer and catechism. I live according to
the Scriptures.... I don’t injure anyone, I keep my flesh in purity and
continence, I observe the fasts, I eat at fitting times. Another man will
take no pleasure in anything but vodka and lewd talk, but when I have time
I sit in a corner and read a book. I read and I weep and weep.”


“What do you weep for?”


“They write so pathetically! For some books one gives but a five-kopeck
piece, and yet one weeps and sighs exceedingly over it.”


“Is your father dead?” asked Ptaha.


“I don’t know, good man. I don’t know my parent; it is no use concealing
it. I judge that I was mamma’s illegitimate son. My mamma lived all her
life with the gentry, and did not want to marry a simple peasant....”


“And so she fell into the master’s hands,” laughed Ptaha.


“She did transgress, that’s true. She was pious, God-fearing, but she did
not keep her maiden purity. It is a sin, of course, a great sin, there’s
no doubt about it, but to make up for it there is, maybe, noble blood in
me. Maybe I am only a peasant by class, but in nature a noble gentleman.”


The “noble gentleman” uttered all this in a soft, sugary tenor, wrinkling
up his narrow forehead and emitting creaking sounds from his red, frozen
little nose. Ptaha listened and looked askance at him in wonder,
continually shrugging his shoulders.


After going nearly five miles the constables and the tramp sat down on a
mound to rest.


“Even a dog knows his name,” Ptaha muttered. “My name is Andryushka, his
is Nikandr; every man has his holy name, and it can’t be forgotten.
Nohow.”


“Who has any need to know my name?” sighed the tramp, leaning his cheek on
his fist. “And what advantage would it be to me if they did know it? If I
were allowed to go where I would—but it would only make things
worse. I know the law, Christian brothers. Now I am a tramp who doesn’t
remember his name, and it’s the very most if they send me to Eastern
Siberia and give me thirty or forty lashes; but if I were to tell them my
real name and description they would send me back to hard labour, I know!”


“Why, have you been a convict?”


“I have, dear friend. For four years I went about with my head shaved and
fetters on my legs.”


“What for?”


“For murder, my good man! When I was still a boy of eighteen or so, my
mamma accidentally poured arsenic instead of soda and acid into my
master’s glass. There were boxes of all sorts in the storeroom, numbers of
them; it was easy to make a mistake over them.”


The tramp sighed, shook his head, and said:


“She was a pious woman, but, who knows? another man’s soul is a slumbering
forest! It may have been an accident, or maybe she could not endure the
affront of seeing the master prefer another servant.... Perhaps she put it
in on purpose, God knows! I was young then, and did not understand it
all... now I remember that our master had taken another mistress and mamma
was greatly disturbed. Our trial lasted nearly two years.... Mamma was
condemned to penal servitude for twenty years, and I, on account of my
youth, only to seven.”


“And why were you sentenced?”


“As an accomplice. I handed the glass to the master. That was always the
custom. Mamma prepared the soda and I handed it to him. Only I tell you
all this as a Christian, brothers, as I would say it before God. Don’t you
tell anybody....”


“Oh, nobody’s going to ask us,” said Ptaha. “So you’ve run away from
prison, have you?”


“I have, dear friend. Fourteen of us ran away. Some folks, God bless them!
ran away and took me with them. Now you tell me, on your conscience, good
man, what reason have I to disclose my name? They will send me back to
penal servitude, you know! And I am not fit for penal servitude! I am a
refined man in delicate health. I like to sleep and eat in cleanliness.
When I pray to God I like to light a little lamp or a candle, and not to
have a noise around me. When I bow down to the ground I like the floor not
to be dirty or spat upon. And I bow down forty times every morning and
evening, praying for mamma.”


The tramp took off his cap and crossed himself.


“And let them send me to Eastern Siberia,” he said; “I am not afraid of
that.”


“Surely that’s no better?”


“It is quite a different thing. In penal servitude you are like a crab in
a basket: crowding, crushing, jostling, there’s no room to breathe; it’s
downright hell—such hell, may the Queen of Heaven keep us from it!
You are a robber and treated like a robber—worse than any dog. You
can’t sleep, you can’t eat or even say your prayers. But it’s not like
that in a settlement. In a settlement I shall be a member of a commune
like other people. The authorities are bound by law to give me my share...
ye-es! They say the land costs nothing, no more than snow; you can take
what you like! They will give me corn land and building land and
garden.... I shall plough my fields like other people, sow seed. I shall
have cattle and stock of all sorts, bees, sheep, and dogs.... A Siberian
cat, that rats and mice may not devour my goods.... I will put up a house,
I shall buy ikons.... Please God, I’ll get married, I shall have
children....”


The tramp muttered and looked, not at his listeners, but away into the
distance. Naive as his dreams were, they were uttered in such a genuine
and heartfelt tone that it was difficult not to believe in them. The
tramp’s little mouth was screwed up in a smile. His eyes and little nose
and his whole face were fixed and blank with blissful anticipation of
happiness in the distant future. The constables listened and looked at him
gravely, not without sympathy. They, too, believed in his dreams.


“I am not afraid of Siberia,” the tramp went on muttering. “Siberia is
just as much Russia and has the same God and Tsar as here. They are just
as orthodox Christians as you and I. Only there is more freedom there and
people are better off. Everything is better there. Take the rivers there,
for instance; they are far better than those here. There’s no end of fish;
and all sorts of wild fowl. And my greatest pleasure, brothers, is
fishing. Give me no bread to eat, but let me sit with a fishhook. Yes,
indeed! I fish with a hook and with a wire line, and set creels, and when
the ice comes I catch with a net. I am not strong to draw up the net, so I
shall hire a man for five kopecks. And, Lord, what a pleasure it is! You
catch an eel-pout or a roach of some sort and are as pleased as though you
had met your own brother. And would you believe it, there’s a special art
for every fish: you catch one with a live bait, you catch another with a
grub, the third with a frog or a grasshopper. One has to understand all
that, of course! For example, take the eel-pout. It is not a delicate fish—it
will take a perch; and a pike loves a gudgeon, the shilishper likes
a butterfly. If you fish for a roach in a rapid stream there is no greater
pleasure. You throw the line of seventy feet without lead, with a
butterfly or a beetle, so that the bait floats on the surface; you stand
in the water without your trousers and let it go with the current, and
tug! the roach pulls at it! Only you have got to be artful that he doesn’t
carry off the bait, the damned rascal. As soon as he tugs at your line
you must whip it up; it’s no good waiting. It’s wonderful what a lot of
fish I’ve caught in my time. When we were running away the other convicts
would sleep in the forest; I could not sleep, but I was off to the river.
The rivers there are wide and rapid, the banks are steep—awfully!
It’s all slumbering forests on the bank. The trees are so tall that if you
look to the top it makes you dizzy. Every pine would be worth ten roubles
by the prices here.”


In the overwhelming rush of his fancies, of artistic images of the past
and sweet presentiments of happiness in the future, the poor wretch sank
into silence, merely moving his lips as though whispering to himself. The
vacant, blissful smile never left his lips. The constables were silent.
They were pondering with bent heads. In the autumn stillness, when the
cold, sullen mist that rises from the earth lies like a weight on the
heart, when it stands like a prison wall before the eyes, and reminds man
of the limitation of his freedom, it is sweet to think of the broad, rapid
rivers, with steep banks wild and luxuriant, of the impenetrable forests,
of the boundless steppes. Slowly and quietly the fancy pictures how early
in the morning, before the flush of dawn has left the sky, a man makes his
way along the steep deserted bank like a tiny speck: the ancient,
mast-like pines rise up in terraces on both sides of the torrent, gaze
sternly at the free man and murmur menacingly; rocks, huge stones, and
thorny bushes bar his way, but he is strong in body and bold in spirit,
and has no fear of the pine-trees, nor stones, nor of his solitude, nor of
the reverberating echo which repeats the sound of every footstep that he
takes.


The peasants called up a picture of a free life such as they had never
lived; whether they vaguely recalled the images of stories heard long ago
or whether notions of a free life had been handed down to them with their
flesh and blood from far-off free ancestors, God knows!


The first to break the silence was Nikandr Sapozhnikov, who had not till
then let fall a single word. Whether he envied the tramp’s transparent
happiness, or whether he felt in his heart that dreams of happiness were
out of keeping with the grey fog and the dirty brown mud—anyway, he
looked sternly at the tramp and said:


“It’s all very well, to be sure, only you won’t reach those plenteous
regions, brother. How could you? Before you’d gone two hundred miles you’d
give up your soul to God. Just look what a weakling you are! Here you’ve
hardly gone five miles and you can’t get your breath.”


The tramp turned slowly toward Nikandr, and the blissful smile vanished
from his face. He looked with a scared and guilty air at the peasant’s
staid face, apparently remembered something, and bent his head. A silence
followed again.... All three were pondering. The peasants were racking
their brains in the effort to grasp in their imagination what can be
grasped by none but God—that is, the vast expanse dividing them from
the land of freedom. Into the tramp’s mind thronged clear and distinct
pictures more terrible than that expanse. Before him rose vividly the
picture of the long legal delays and procrastinations, the temporary and
permanent prisons, the convict boats, the wearisome stoppages on the way,
the frozen winters, illnesses, deaths of companions....


The tramp bJlinked guiltily, wiped the tiny drops of sweat from his
forehead with his sleeve, drew a deep breath as though he had just leapt
out of a very hot bath, then wiped his forehead with the other sleeve and
looked round fearfully.


“That’s true; you won’t get there!” Ptaha agreed. “You are not much of a
walker! Look at you—nothing but skin and bone! You’ll die, brother!”


“Of course he’ll die! What could he do?” said Nikandr. “He’s fit for the
hospital now.... For sure!”


The man who had forgotten his name looked at the stern, unconcerned faces
of his sinister companions, and without taking off his cap, hurriedly
crossed himself, staring with wide-open eyes.... He trembled, his head
shook, and he began twitching all over, like a caterpillar when it is
stepped upon....


“Well, it’s time to go,” said Nikandr, getting up; “we’ve had a rest.”


A minute later they were stepping along the muddy road. The tramp was more
bent than ever, and he thrust his hands further up his sleeves. Ptaha was
silent.








THE PIPE

MELITON SHISHKIN, a bailiff from the Dementyev farm, exhausted by the
sultry heat of the fir-wood and covered with spiders’ webs and
pine-needles, made his way with his gun to the edge of the wood. His Damka—a
mongrel between a yard dog and a setter—an extremely thin bitch
heavy with young, trailed after her master with her wet tail between her
legs, doing all she could to avoid pricking her nose. It was a dull,
overcast morning. Big drops dripped from the bracken and from the trees
that were wrapped in a light mist; there was a pungent smell of decay from
the dampness of the wood.


There were birch-trees ahead of him where the wood ended, and between
their stems and branches he could see the misty distance. Beyond the
birch-trees someone was playing on a shepherd’s rustic pipe. The player
produced no more than five or six notes, dragged them out languidly with
no attempt at forming a tune, and yet there was something harsh and
extremely dreary in the sound of the piping.


As the copse became sparser, and the pines were interspersed with young
birch-trees, Meliton saw a herd. Hobbled horses, cows, and sheep were
wandering among the bushes and, snapping the dry branches, sniffed at the
herbage of the copse. A lean old shepherd, bareheaded, in a torn grey
smock, stood leaning against the wet trunk of a birch-tree. He stared at
the ground, pondering something, and played his pipe, it seemed,
mechanically.


“Good-day, grandfather! God help you!” Meliton greeted him in a thin,
husky voice which seemed incongruous with his huge stature and big, fleshy
face. “How cleverly you are playing your pipe! Whose herd are you
minding?”


“The Artamonovs’,” the shepherd answered reluctantly, and he thrust the
pipe into his bosom.


“So I suppose the wood is the Artamonovs’ too?” Meliton inquired, looking
about him. “Yes, it is the Artamonovs’; only fancy... I had completely
lost myself. I got my face scratched all over in the thicket.”


He sat down on the wet earth and began rolling up a bit of newspaper into
a cigarette.


Like his voice, everything about the man was small and out of keeping with
his height, his breadth, and his fleshy face: his smiles, his eyes, his
buttons, his tiny cap, which would hardly keep on his big, closely-cropped
head. When he talked and smiled there was something womanish, timid, and
meek about his puffy, shaven face and his whole figure.


“What weather! God help us!” he said, and he turned his head from side to
side. “Folk have not carried the oats yet, and the rain seems as though it
had been taken on for good, God bless it.”


The shepherd looked at the sky, from which a drizzling rain was falling,
at the wood, at the bailif’s wet clothes, pondered, and said nothing.


“The whole summer has been the same,” sighed Meliton. “A bad business for
the peasants and no pleasure for the gentry.”


The shepherd looked at the sky again, thought a moment, and said
deliberately, as though chewing each word:


“It’s all going the same way.... There is nothing good to be looked for.”


“How are things with you here?” Meliton inquired, lighting his cigarette.
“Haven’t you seen any coveys of grouse in the Artamonovs’ clearing?”


The shepherd did not answer at once. He looked again at the sky and to
right and left, thought a little, bJlinked.... Apparently he attached no
little significance to his words, and to increase their value tried to
pronounce them with deliberation and a certain solemnity. The expression
of his face had the sharpness and staidness of old age, and the fact that
his nose had a saddle-shaped depression across the middle and his nostrils
turned upwards gave him a sly and sarcastic look.


“No, I believe I haven’t,” he said. “Our huntsman Eryomka was saying that
on Elijah’s Day he started one covey near Pustoshye, but I dare say he was
lying. There are very few birds.”


“Yes, brother, very few.... Very few everywhere! The shooting here, if one
is to look at it with common sense, is good for nothing and not worth
having. There is no game at all, and what there is is not worth dirtying
your hands over—it is not full-grown. It is such poor stuff that one
is ashamed to look at it.”


Meliton gave a laugh and waved his hands.


“Things happen so queerly in this world that it is simply laughable and
nothing else. Birds nowadays have become so unaccountable: they sit late
on their eggs, and there are some, I declare, that have not hatched them
by St. Peter’s Day!”


“It’s all going the same,” said the shepherd, turning his face upwards.
“There was little game last year, this year there are fewer birds still,
and in another five years, mark my words, there will be none at all. As
far as I can see there will soon be not only no game, but no birds at
all.”


“Yes,” Meliton assented, after a moment’s thought. “That’s true.”


The shepherd gave a bitter smile and shook his head.


“It’s a wonder,” he said, “what has become of them all! I remember twenty
years ago there used to be geese here, and cranes and ducks and grouse—clouds
and clouds of them! The gentry used to meet together for shooting, and one
heard nothing but pouf-pouf-pouf! pouf-pouf-pouf! There was no end to the
woodcocks, the snipe, and the little teals, and the water-snipe were as
common as starlings, or let us say sparrows—lots and lots of them!
And what has become of them all? We don’t even see the birds of prey. The
eagles, the hawks, and the owls have all gone.... There are fewer of every
sort of wild beast, too. Nowadays, brother, even the wolf and the fox have
grown rare, let alone the bear or the otter. And you know in old days
there were even elks! For forty years I have been observing the works of
God from year to year, and it is my opinion that everything is going the
same way.”


“What way?”


“To the bad, young man. To ruin, we must suppose... The time has come for
God’s world to perish.”


The old man put on his cap and began gazing at the sky.


“It’s a pity,” he sighed, after a brief silence. “O God, what a pity! Of
course it is God’s will; the world was not created by us, but yet it is a
pity, brother. If a single tree withers away, or let us say a single cow
dies, it makes one sorry, but what will it be, good man, if the whole
world crumbles into dust? Such blessings, Lord Jesus! The sun, and the
sky, and the forest, and the rivers, and the creatures—all these
have been created, adapted, and adjusted to one another. Each has been put
to its appointed task and knows its place. And all that must perish.”


A mournful smile gleamed on the shepherd’s face, and his eyelids quivered.


“You say—the world is perishing,” said Meliton, pondering. “It may
be that the end of the world is near at hand, but you can’t judge by the
birds. I don’t think the birds can be taken as a sign.”


“Not the birds only,” said the shepherd. “It’s the wild beasts, too, and
the cattle, and the bees, and the fish.... If you don’t believe me ask the
old people; every old man will tell you that the fish are not at all what
they used to be. In the seas, in the lakes, and in the rivers, there are
fewer fish from year to year. In our Pestchanka, I remember, pike used to
be caught a yard long, and there were eel-pouts, and roach, and bream, and
every fish had a presentable appearance; while nowadays, if you catch a
wretched little pikelet or perch six inches long you have to be thankful.
There are not any gudgeon even worth talking about. Every year it is worse
and worse, and in a little while there will be no fish at all. And take
the rivers now... the rivers are drying up, for sure.”


“It is true; they are drying up.”


“To be sure, that’s what I say. Every year they are shallower and
shallower, and there are not the deep holes there used to be. And do you
see the bushes yonder?” the old man asked, pointing to one side. “Beyond
them is an old river-bed; it’s called a backwater. In my father’s time the
Pestchanka flowed there, but now look; where have the evil spirits taken
it to? It changes its course, and, mind you, it will go on changing till
such time as it has dried up altogether. There used to be marshes and
ponds beyond Kurgasovo, and where are they now? And what has become of the
streams? Here in this very wood we used to have a stream flowing, and such
a stream that the peasants used to set creels in it and caught pike; wild
ducks used to spend the winter by it, and nowadays there is no water in it
worth speaking of, even at the spring floods. Yes, brother, look where you
will, things are bad everywhere. Everywhere!”


A silence followed. Meliton sank into thought, with his eyes fixed on one
spot. He wanted to think of some one part of nature as yet untouched by
the all-embracing ruin. Spots of light glistened on the mist and the
slanting streaks of rain as though on opaque glass, and immediately died
away again—it was the rising sun trying to break through the clouds
and peep at the earth.


“Yes, the forests, too...” Meliton muttered.


“The forests, too,” the shepherd repeated. “They cut them down, and they
catch fire, and they wither away, and no new ones are growing. Whatever
does grow up is cut down at once; one day it shoots up and the next it has
been cut down—and so on without end till nothing’s left. I have kept
the herds of the commune ever since the time of Freedom, good man; before
the time of Freedom I was shepherd of the master’s herds. I have watched
them in this very spot, and I can’t remember a summer day in all my life
that I have not been here. And all the time I have been observing the
works of God. I have looked at them in my time till I know them, and it is
my opinion that all things growing are on the decline. Whether you take
the rye, or the vegetables, or flowers of any sort, they are all going the
same way.”


“But people have grown better,” observed the bailiff.


“In what way better?”


“Cleverer.”


“Cleverer, maybe, that’s true, young man; but what’s the use of that? What
earthly good is cleverness to people on the brink of ruin? One can perish
without cleverness. What’s the good of cleverness to a huntsman if there
is no game? What I think is that God has given men brains and taken away
their strength. People have grown weak, exceedingly weak. Take me, for
instance... I am not worth a halfpenny, I am the humblest peasant in the
whole village, and yet, young man, I have strength. Mind you, I am in my
seventies, and I tend my herd day in and day out, and keep the night
watch, too, for twenty kopecks, and I don’t sleep, and I don’t feel the
cold; my son is cleverer than I am, but put him in my place and he would
ask for a raise next day, or would be going to the doctors. There it is. I
eat nothing but bread, for ‘Give us this day our daily bread,’ and my
father ate nothing but bread, and my grandfather; but the peasant nowadays
must have tea and vodka and white loaves, and must sleep from sunset to
dawn, and he goes to the doctor and pampers himself in all sorts of ways.
And why is it? He has grown weak; he has not the strength to endure. If he
wants to stay awake, his eyes close—there is no doing anything.”


“That’s true,” Meliton agreed; “the peasant is good for nothing nowadays.”


“It’s no good hiding what is wrong; we get worse from year to year. And if
you take the gentry into consideration, they’ve grown feebler even more
than the peasants have. The gentleman nowadays has mastered everything; he
knows what he ought not to know, and what is the sense of it? It makes you
feel pitiful to look at him.... He is a thin, puny little fellow, like
some Hungarian or Frenchman; there is no dignity nor air about him; it’s
only in name he is a gentleman. There is no place for him, poor dear, and
nothing for him to do, and there is no making out what he wants. Either he
sits with a hook catching fish, or he lolls on his back reading, or trots
about among the peasants saying all sorts of things to them, and those
that are hungry go in for being clerks. So he spends his life in vain. And
he has no notion of doing something real and useful. The gentry in old
days were half of them generals, but nowadays they are—a poor lot.”


“They are badly off nowadays,” said Meliton.


“They are poorer because God has taken away their strength. You can’t go
against God.”


Meliton stared at a fixed point again. After thinking a little he heaved a
sigh as staid, reasonable people do sigh, shook his head, and said:


“And all because of what? We have sinned greatly, we have forgotten God..
and it seems that the time has come for all to end. And, after all, the
world can’t last for ever—it’s time to know when to take leave.”


The shepherd sighed and, as though wishing to cut short an unpleasant
conversation, he walked away from the birch-tree and began silently
reckoning over the cows.


“Hey-hey-hey!” he shouted. “Hey-hey-hey! Bother you, the plague take you!
The devil has taken you into the thicket. Tu-lu-lu!”


With an angry face he went into the bushes to collect his herd. Meliton
got up and sauntered slowly along the edge of the wood. He looked at the
ground at his feet and pondered; he still wanted to think of something
which had not yet been touched by death. Patches of light crept upon the
slanting streaks of rain again; they danced on the tops of the trees and
died away among the wet leaves. Damka found a hedgehog under a bush, and
wanting to attract her master’s attention to it, barked and howled.


“Did you have an eclipse or not?” the shepherd called from the bushes.


“Yes, we had,” answered Meliton.


“Ah! Folks are complaining all about that there was one. It shows there is
disorder even in the heavens! It’s not for nothing.... Hey-hey-hey! Hey!”


Driving his herd together to the edge of the wood, the shepherd leaned
against the birch-tree, looked up at the sky, without haste took his pipe
from his bosom and began playing. As before, he played mechanically and
took no more than five or six notes; as though the pipe had come into his
hands for the first time, the sounds floated from it uncertainly, with no
regularity, not blending into a tune, but to Meliton, brooding on the
destruction of the world, there was a sound in it of something very
depressing and revolting which he would much rather not have heard. The
highest, shrillest notes, which quivered and broke, seemed to be weeping
disconsolately, as though the pipe were sick and frightened, while the
lowest notes for some reason reminded him of the mist, the dejected trees,
the grey sky. Such music seemed in keeping with the weather, the old man
and his sayings.


Meliton wanted to complain. He went up to the old man and, looking at his
mournful, mocking face and at the pipe, muttered:


“And life has grown worse, grandfather. It is utterly impossible to live.
Bad crops, want.... Cattle plague continually, diseases of all sorts....
We are crushed by poverty.”


The bailiff’s puffy face turned crimson and took a dejected, womanish
expression. He twirled his fingers as though seeking words to convey his
vague feeling and went on:


“Eight children, a wife... and my mother still living, and my whole salary
ten roubles a month and to board myself. My wife has become a Satan from
poverty.... I go off drinking myself. I am a sensible, steady man; I have
education. I ought to sit at home in peace, but I stray about all day with
my gun like a dog because it is more than I can stand; my home is hateful
to me!”


Feeling that his tongue was uttering something quite different from what
he wanted to say, the bailiff waved his hand and said bitterly:


“If the world’s going to end I wish it would make haste about it. There’s
no need to drag it out and make folks miserable for nothing....”


The old man took the pipe from his lips and, screwing up one eye, looked
into its little opening. His face was sad and covered with thick drops
like tears. He smiled and said:


“It’s a pity, my friend! My goodness, what a pity! The earth, the forest,
the sky, the beasts of all sorts—all this has been created, you
know, adapted; they all have their intelligence. It is all going to ruin.
And most of all I am sorry for people.”


There was the sound in the wood of heavy rain coming nearer. Meliton
looked in the direction of the sound, did up all his buttons, and said:


“I am going to the village. Good-bye, grandfather. What is your name?”


“Luka the Poor.”


“Well, good-bye, Luka! Thank you for your good words. Damka, ici!”


After parting from the shepherd Meliton made his way along the edge of the
wood, and then down hill to a meadow which by degrees turned into a marsh.
There was a squelch of water under his feet, and the rusty marsh sedge,
still green and juicy, drooped down to the earth as though afraid of being
trampled underfoot. Beyond the marsh, on the bank of the Pestchanka, of
which the old man had spoken, stood a row of willows, and beyond the
willows a barn looked dark blue in the mist. One could feel the approach
of that miserable, utterly inevitable season, when the fields grow dark
and the earth is muddy and cold, when the weeping willow seems still more
mournful and tears trickle down its stem, and only the cranes fly away
from the general misery, and even they, as though afraid of insulting
dispirited nature by the expression of their happiness, fill the air with
their mournful, dreary notes.


Meliton plodded along to the river, and heard the sounds of the pipe
gradually dying away behind him. He still wanted to complain. He looked
dejectedly about him, and he felt insufferably sorry for the sky and the
earth and the sun and the woods and his Damka, and when the highest
drawn-out note of the pipe floated quivering in the air, like a voice
weeping, he felt extremely bitter and resentful of the impropriety in the
conduct of nature.


The high note quivered, broke off, and the pipe was silent.








AGAFYA

DURING my stay in the district of S. I often used to go to see the
watchman Savva Stukatch, or simply Savka, in the kitchen gardens of
Dubovo. These kitchen gardens were my favorite resort for so-called
“mixed” fishing, when one goes out without knowing what day or hour one
may return, taking with one every sort of fishing tackle as well as a
store of provisions. To tell the truth, it was not so much the fishing
that attracted me as the peaceful stroll, the meals at no set time, the
talk with Savka, and being for so long face to face with the calm summer
nights. Savka was a young man of five-and-twenty, well grown and handsome,
and as strong as a flint. He had the reputation of being a sensible and
reasonable fellow. He could read and write, and very rarely drank, but as
a workman this strong and healthy young man was not worth a farthing. A
sluggish, overpowering sloth was mingled with the strength in his muscles,
which were strong as cords. Like everyone else in his village, he lived in
his own hut, and had his share of land, but neither tilled it nor sowed
it, and did not work at any sort of trade. His old mother begged alms at
people’s windows and he himself lived like a bird of the air; he did not
know in the morning what he would eat at midday. It was not that he was
lacking in will, or energy, or feeling for his mother; it was simply that
he felt no inclination for work and did not recognize the advantage of it.
His whole figure suggested unruffled serenity, an innate, almost artistic
passion for living carelessly, never with his sleeves tucked up. When
Savka’s young, healthy body had a physical craving for muscular work, the
young man abandoned himself completely for a brief interval to some free
but nonsensical pursuit, such as sharpening skates not wanted for any
special purpose, or racing about after the peasant women. His favorite
attitude was one of concentrated immobility. He was capable of standing
for hours at a stretch in the same place with his eyes fixed on the same
spot without stirring. He never moved except on impulse, and then only
when an occasion presented itself for some rapid and abrupt action:
catching a running dog by the tail, pulling off a woman’s kerchief, or
jumping over a big hole. It need hardly be said that with such parsimony
of movement Savka was as poor as a mouse and lived worse than any homeless
outcast. As time went on, I suppose he accumulated arrears of taxes and,
young and sturdy as he was, he was sent by the commune to do an old man’s
job—to be watchman and scarecrow in the kitchen gardens. However
much they laughed at him for his premature senility he did not object to
it. This position, quiet and convenient for motionless contemplation,
exactly fitted his temperament.


It happened I was with this Savka one fine May evening. I remember I was
lying on a torn and dirty sackcloth cover close to the shanty from which
came a heavy, fragrant scent of hay. Clasping my hands under my head I
looked before me. At my feet was lying a wooden fork. Behind it Savka’s
dog Kutka stood out like a black patch, and not a dozen feet from Kutka
the ground ended abruptly in the steep bank of the little river. Lying
down I could not see the river; I could only see the tops of the young
willows growing thickly on the nearer bank, and the twisting, as it were
gnawed away, edges of the opposite bank. At a distance beyond the bank on
the dark hillside the huts of the village in which Savka lived lay
huddling together like frightened young partridges. Beyond the hill the
afterglow of sunset still lingered in the sky. One pale crimson streak was
all that was left, and even that began to be covered by little clouds as a
fire with ash.


A copse with alder-trees, softly whispering, and from time to time
shuddering in the fitful breeze, lay, a dark blur, on the right of the
kitchen gardens; on the left stretched the immense plain. In the distance,
where the eye could not distinguish between the sky and the plain, there
was a bright gleam of light. A little way off from me sat Savka. With his
legs tucked under him like a Turk and his head hanging, he looked
pensively at Kutka. Our hooks with live bait on them had long been in the
river, and we had nothing left to do but to abandon ourselves to repose,
which Savka, who was never exhausted and always rested, loved so much. The
glow had not yet quite died away, but the summer night was already
enfolding nature in its caressing, soothing embrace.


Everything was sinking into its first deep sleep except some night bird
unfamiliar to me, which indolently uttered a long, protracted cry in
several distinct notes like the phrase, “Have you seen Ni-ki-ta?” and
immediately answered itself, “Seen him, seen him, seen him!”


“Why is it the nightingales aren’t singing tonight?” I asked Savka.


He turned slowly towards me. His features were large, but his face was
open, soft, and expressive as a woman’s. Then he gazed with his mild,
dreamy eyes at the copse, at the willows, slowly pulled a whistle out of
his pocket, put it in his mouth and whistled the note of a
hen-nightingale. And at once, as though in answer to his call, a landrail
called on the opposite bank.


“There’s a nightingale for you...” laughed Savka. “Drag-drag! drag-drag!
just like pulling at a hook, and yet I bet he thinks he is singing, too.”


“I like that bird,” I said. “Do you know, when the birds are migrating the
landrail does not fly, but runs along the ground? It only flies over the
rivers and the sea, but all the rest it does on foot.”


“Upon my word, the dog...” muttered Savka, looking with respect in the
direction of the calling landrail.


Knowing how fond Savka was of listening, I told him all I had learned
about the landrail from sportsman’s books. From the landrail I passed
imperceptibly to the migration of the birds. Savka listened attentively,
looking at me without bJlinking, and smiling all the while with pleasure.


“And which country is most the bird’s home? Ours or those foreign parts?”
he asked.


“Ours, of course. The bird itself is hatched here, and it hatches out its
little ones here in its native country, and they only fly off there to
escape being frozen.”


“It’s interesting,” said Savka. “Whatever one talks about it is always
interesting. Take a bird now, or a man... or take this little stone;
there’s something to learn about all of them.... Ah, sir, if I had known
you were coming I wouldn’t have told a woman to come here this evening....
She asked to come to-day.”


“Oh, please don’t let me be in your way,” I said. “I can lie down in the
wood....”


“What next! She wouldn’t have died if she hadn’t come till to-morrow....
If only she would sit quiet and listen, but she always wants to be
slobbering.... You can’t have a good talk when she’s here.”


“Are you expecting Darya?” I asked, after a pause.


“No... a new one has asked to come this evening... Agafya, the signalman’s
wife.”


Savka said this in his usual passionless, somewhat hollow voice, as though
he were talking of tobacco or porridge, while I started with surprise. I
knew Agafya.... She was quite a young peasant woman of nineteen or twenty,
who had been married not more than a year before to a railway signalman, a
fine young fellow. She lived in the village, and her husband came home
there from the line every night.


“Your goings on with the women will lead to trouble, my boy,” said I.


“Well, may be....”


And after a moment’s thought Savka added:


“I’ve said so to the women; they won’t heed me....They don’t trouble about
it, the silly things!”


Silence followed.... Meanwhile the darkness was growing thicker and
thicker, and objects began to lose their contours. The streak behind the
hill had completely died away, and the stars were growing brighter and
more luminous.... The mournfully monotonous chirping of the grasshoppers,
the call of the landrail, and the cry of the quail did not destroy the
stillness of the night, but, on the contrary, gave it an added monotony.
It seemed as though the soft sounds that enchanted the ear came, not from
birds or insects, but from the stars looking down upon us from the sky....


Savka was the first to break the silence. He slowly turned his eyes from
black Kutka and said:


“I see you are dull, sir. Let’s have supper.”


And without waiting for my consent he crept on his stomach into the
shanty, rummaged about there, making the whole edifice tremble like a
leaf; then he crawled back and set before me my vodka and an earthenware
bowl; in the bowl there were baked eggs, lard scones made of rye, pieces
of black bread, and something else.... We had a drink from a little
crooked glass that wouldn’t stand, and then we fell upon the food....
Coarse grey salt, dirty, greasy cakes, eggs tough as india-rubber, but how
nice it all was!


“You live all alone, but what lots of good things you have,” I said,
pointing to the bowl. “Where do you get them from?”


“The women bring them,” mumbled Savka.


“What do they bring them to you for?”


“Oh... from pity.”


Not only Savka’s menu, but his clothing, too, bore traces of feminine
“pity.” Thus I noticed that he had on, that evening, a new woven belt and
a crimson ribbon on which a copper cross hung round his dirty neck. I knew
of the weakness of the fair sex for Savka, and I knew that he did not like
talking about it, and so I did not carry my inquiries any further. Besides
there was not time to talk.... Kutka, who had been fidgeting about near us
and patiently waiting for scraps, suddenly pricked up his ears and
growled. We heard in the distance repeated splashing of water.


“Someone is coming by the ford,” said Savka.


Three minutes later Kutka growled again and made a sound like a cough.


“Shsh!” his master shouted at him.


In the darkness there was a muffled thud of timid footsteps, and the
silhouette of a woman appeared out of the copse. I recognized her,
although it was dark—it was Agafya. She came up to us diffidently
and stopped, breathing hard. She was breathless, probably not so much from
walking as from fear and the unpleasant sensation everyone experiences in
wading across a river at night. Seeing near the shanty not one but two
persons, she uttered a faint cry and fell back a step.


“Ah... that is you!” said Savka, stuffing a scone into his mouth.


“Ye-es... I,” she muttered, dropping on the ground a bundle of some sort
and looking sideways at me. “Yakov sent his greetings to you and told me
to give you... something here....”


“Come, why tell stories? Yakov!” laughed Savka. “There is no need for
lying; the gentleman knows why you have come! Sit down; you shall have
supper with us.”


Agafya looked sideways at me and sat down irresolutely.


“I thought you weren’t coming this evening,” Savka said, after a prolonged
silence. “Why sit like that? Eat! Or shall I give you a drop of vodka?”


“What an idea!” laughed Agafya; “do you think you have got hold of a
drunkard?...”


“Oh, drink it up.... Your heart will feel warmer.... There!”


Savka gave Agafya the crooked glass. She slowly drank the vodka, ate
nothing with it, but drew a deep breath when she had finished.


“You’ve brought something,” said Savka, untying the bundle and throwing a
condescending, jesting shade into his voice. “Women can never come without
bringing something. Ah, pie and potatoes.... They live well,” he sighed,
turning to me. “They are the only ones in the whole village who have got
potatoes left from the winter!”


In the darkness I did not see Agafya’s face, but from the movement of her
shoulders and head it seemed to me that she could not take her eyes off
Savka’s face. To avoid being the third person at this tryst, I decided to
go for a walk and got up. But at that moment a nightingale in the wood
suddenly uttered two low contralto notes. Half a minute later it gave a
tiny high trill and then, having thus tried its voice, began singing.
Savka jumped up and listened.


“It’s the same one as yesterday,” he said. “Wait a minute.”


And, getting up, he went noiselessly to the wood.


“Why, what do you want with it?” I shouted out after him, “Stop!”


Savka shook his hand as much as to say, “Don’t shout,” and vanished into
the darkness. Savka was an excellent sportsman and fisherman when he
liked, but his talents in this direction were as completely thrown away as
his strength. He was too slothful to do things in the routine way, and
vented his passion for sport in useless tricks. For instance, he would
catch nightingales only with his hands, would shoot pike with a fowling
piece, he would spend whole hours by the river trying to catch little fish
with a big hook.


Left alone with me, Agafya coughed and passed her hand several times over
her forehead.... She began to feel a little drunk from the vodka.


“How are you getting on, Agasha?” I asked her, after a long silence, when
it began to be awkward to remain mute any longer.


“Very well, thank God.... Don’t tell anyone, sir, will you?” she added
suddenly in a whisper.


“That’s all right,” I reassured her. “But how reckless you are, Agasha!...
What if Yakov finds out?”


“He won’t find out.”


“But what if he does?”


“No... I shall be at home before he is. He is on the line now, and he will
come back when the mail train brings him, and from here I can hear when
the train’s coming....”


Agafya once more passed her hand over her forehead and looked away in the
direction in which Savka had vanished. The nightingale was singing. Some
night bird flew low down close to the ground and, noticing us, was
startled, fluttered its wings and flew across to the other side of the
river.


Soon the nightingale was silent, but Savka did not come back. Agafya got
up, took a few steps uneasily, and sat down again.


“What is he doing?” she could not refrain from saying. “The train’s not
coming in to-morrow! I shall have to go away directly.”


“Savka,” I shouted. “Savka.”


I was not answered even by an echo. Agafya moved uneasily and sat down
again.


“It’s time I was going,” she said in an agitated voice. “The train will be
here directly! I know when the trains come in.”


The poor woman was not mistaken. Before a quarter of an hour had passed a
sound was heard in the distance.


Agafya kept her eyes fixed on the copse for a long time and moved her
hands impatiently.


“Why, where can he be?” she said, laughing nervously. “Where has the devil
carried him? I am going! I really must be going.”


Meanwhile the noise was growing more and more distinct. By now one could
distinguish the rumble of the wheels from the heavy gasps of the engine.
Then we heard the whistle, the train crossed the bridge with a hollow
rumble... another minute and all was still.


“I’ll wait one minute more,” said Agafya, sitting down resolutely. “So be
it, I’ll wait.”


At last Savka appeared in the darkness. He walked noiselessly on the
crumbling earth of the kitchen gardens and hummed something softly to
himself.


“Here’s a bit of luck; what do you say to that now?” he said gaily. “As
soon as I got up to the bush and began taking aim with my hand it left off
singing! Ah, the bald dog! I waited and waited to see when it would begin
again, but I had to give it up.”


Savka flopped clumsily down to the ground beside Agafya and, to keep his
balance, clutched at her waist with both hands.


“Why do you look cross, as though your aunt were your mother?” he asked.


With all his soft-heartedness and good-nature, Savka despised women. He
behaved carelessly, condescendingly with them, and even stooped to
scornful laughter of their feelings for himself. God knows, perhaps this
careless, contemptuous manner was one of the causes of his irresistible
attraction for the village Dulcineas. He was handsome and well-built; in
his eyes there was always a soft friendliness, even when he was looking at
the women he so despised, but the fascination was not to be explained by
merely external qualities. Apart from his happy exterior and original
manner, one must suppose that the touching position of Savka as an
acknowledged failure and an unhappy exile from his own hut to the kitchen
gardens also had an influence upon the women.


“Tell the gentleman what you have come here for!” Savka went on, still
holding Agafya by the waist. “Come, tell him, you good married woman!
Ho-ho! Shall we have another drop of vodka, friend Agasha?”


I got up and, threading my way between the plots, I walked the length of
the kitchen garden. The dark beds looked like flattened-out graves. They
smelt of dug earth and the tender dampness of plants beginning to be
covered with dew.... A red light was still gleaming on the left. It winked
genially and seemed to smile.


I heard a happy laugh. It was Agafya laughing.


“And the train?” I thought. “The train has come in long ago.”


Waiting a little longer, I went back to the shanty. Savka was sitting
motionless, his legs crossed like a Turk, and was softly, scarcely audibly
humming a song consisting of words of one syllable something like: “Out on
you, fie on you... I and you.” Agafya, intoxicated by the vodka, by
Savka’s scornful caresses, and by the stifling warmth of the night, was
lying on the earth beside him, pressing her face convulsively to his
knees. She was so carried away by her feelings that she did not even
notice my arrival.


“Agasha, the train has been in a long time,” I said.


“It’s time—it’s time you were gone,” Savka, tossing his head, took
up my thought. “What are you sprawling here for? You shameless hussy!”


Agafya started, took her head from his knees, glanced at me, and sank down
beside him again.


“You ought to have gone long ago,” I said.


Agafya turned round and got up on one knee.... She was unhappy.... For
half a minute her whole figure, as far as I could distinguish it through
the darkness, expressed conflict and hesitation. There was an instant
when, seeming to come to herself, she drew herself up to get upon her
feet, but then some invincible and implacable force seemed to push her
whole body, and she sank down beside Savka again.


“Bother him!” she said, with a wild, guttural laugh, and reckless
determination, impotence, and pain could be heard in that laugh.


I strolled quietly away to the copse, and from there down to the river,
where our fishing lines were set. The river slept. Some soft,
fluffy-petalled flower on a tall stalk touched my cheek tenderly like a
child who wants to let one know it’s awake. To pass the time I felt for
one of the lines and pulled at it. It yielded easily and hung limply—nothing
had been caught.... The further bank and the village could not be seen. A
light gleamed in one hut, but soon went out. I felt my way along the bank,
found a hollow place which I had noticed in the daylight, and sat down in
it as in an arm-chair. I sat there a long time.... I saw the stars begin
to grow misty and lose their brightness; a cool breath passed over the
earth like a faint sigh and touched the leaves of the slumbering
osiers....


“A-ga-fya!” a hollow voice called from the village. “Agafya!”


It was the husband, who had returned home, and in alarm was looking for
his wife in the village. At that moment there came the sound of
unrestrained laughter: the wife, forgetful of everything, sought in her
intoxication to make up by a few hours of happiness for the misery
awaiting her next day.


I dropped asleep.


When I woke up Savka was sitting beside me and lightly shaking my
shoulder. The river, the copse, both banks, green and washed, trees and
fields—all were bathed in bright morning light. Through the slim
trunks of the trees the rays of the newly risen sun beat upon my back.


“So that’s how you catch fish?” laughed Savka. “Get up!”


I got up, gave a luxurious stretch, and began greedily drinking in the
damp and fragrant air.


“Has Agasha gone?” I asked.


“There she is,” said Savka, pointing in the direction of the ford.


I glanced and saw Agafya. Dishevelled, with her kerchief dropping off her
head, she was crossing the river, holding up her skirt. Her legs were
scarcely moving....


“The cat knows whose meat it has eaten,” muttered Savka, screwing up his
eyes as he looked at her. “She goes with her tail hanging down.... They
are sly as cats, these women, and timid as hares.... She didn’t go, silly
thing, in the evening when we told her to! Now she will catch it, and
they’ll flog me again at the peasant court... all on account of the
women....”


Agafya stepped upon the bank and went across the fields to the village. At
first she walked fairly boldly, but soon terror and excitement got the
upper hand; she turned round fearfully, stopped and took breath.


“Yes, you are frightened!” Savka laughed mournfully, looking at the bright
green streak left by Agafya in the dewy grass. “She doesn’t want to go!
Her husband’s been standing waiting for her for a good hour.... Did you
see him?”


Savka said the last words with a smile, but they sent a chill to my heart.
In the village, near the furthest hut, Yakov was standing in the road,
gazing fixedly at his returning wife. He stood without stirring, and was
as motionless as a post. What was he thinking as he looked at her? What
words was he preparing to greet her with? Agafya stood still a little
while, looked round once more as though expecting help from us, and went
on. I have never seen anyone, drunk or sober, move as she did. Agafya
seemed to be shrivelled up by her husband’s eyes. At one time she moved in
zigzags, then she moved her feet up and down without going forward,
bending her knees and stretching out her hands, then she staggered back.
When she had gone another hundred paces she looked round once more and sat
down.


“You ought at least to hide behind a bush...” I said to Savka. “If the
husband sees you...”


“He knows, anyway, who it is Agafya has come from.... The women don’t go
to the kitchen garden at night for cabbages—we all know that.”


I glanced at Savka’s face. It was pale and puckered up with a look of
fastidious pity such as one sees in the faces of people watching tortured
animals.


“What’s fun for the cat is tears for the mouse...” he muttered.


Agafya suddenly jumped up, shook her head, and with a bold step went
towards her husband. She had evidently plucked up her courage and made up
her mind.








AT CHRISTMAS TIME


I


|“WHAT shall I write?” said Yegor, and he dipped his pen in the ink.


Vasilisa had not seen her daughter for four years. Her daughter Yefimya
had gone after her wedding to Petersburg, had sent them two letters, and
since then seemed to vanish out of their lives; there had been no sight
nor sound of her. And whether the old woman were milking her cow at dawn,
or heating her stove, or dozing at night, she was always thinking of one
and the same thing—what was happening to Yefimya, whether she were
alive out yonder. She ought to have sent a letter, but the old father
could not write, and there was no one to write.


But now Christmas had come, and Vasilisa could not bear it any longer, and
went to the tavern to Yegor, the brother of the innkeeper’s wife, who had
sat in the tavern doing nothing ever since he came back from the army;
people said that he could write letters very well if he were properly
paid. Vasilisa talked to the cook at the tavern, then to the mistress of
the house, then to Yegor himself. They agreed upon fifteen kopecks.


And now—it happened on the second day of the holidays, in the tavern
kitchen—Yegor was sitting at the table, holding the pen in his hand.
Vasilisa was standing before him, pondering with an expression of anxiety
and woe on her face. Pyotr, her husband, a very thin old man with a
brownish bald patch, had come with her; he stood looking straight before
him like a blind man. On the stove a piece of pork was being braised in a
saucepan; it was spurting and hissing, and seemed to be actually saying:
“Flu-flu-flu.” It was stifling.


“What am I to write?” Yegor asked again.


“What?” asked Vasilisa, looking at him angrily and suspiciously. “Don’t
worry me! You are not writing for nothing; no fear, you’ll be paid for it.
Come, write: ‘To our dear son-in-law, Andrey Hrisanfitch, and to our only
beloved daughter, Yefimya Petrovna, with our love we send a low bow and
our parental blessing abiding for ever.’”


“Written; fire away.”


“‘And we wish them a happy Christmas; we are alive and well, and I wish
you the same, please the Lord... the Heavenly King.’”


Vasilisa pondered and exchanged glances with the old man.


“‘And I wish you the same, please the Lord the Heavenly King,’” she
repeated, beginning to cry.


She could say nothing more. And yet before, when she lay awake thinking at
night, it had seemed to her that she could not get all she had to say into
a dozen letters. Since the time when her daughter had gone away with her
husband much water had flowed into the sea, the old people had lived
feeling bereaved, and sighed heavily at night as though they had buried
their daughter. And how many events had occurred in the village since
then, how many marriages and deaths! How long the winters had been! How
long the nights!


“It’s hot,” said Yegor, unbuttoning his waistcoat. “It must be seventy
degrees. What more?” he asked.


The old people were silent.


“What does your son-in-law do in Petersburg?” asked Yegor.


“He was a soldier, my good friend,” the old man answered in a weak voice.
“He left the service at the same time as you did. He was a soldier, and
now, to be sure, he is at Petersburg at a hydropathic establishment. The
doctor treats the sick with water. So he, to be sure, is house-porter at
the doctor’s.”


“Here it is written down,” said the old woman, taking a letter out of her
pocket. “We got it from Yefimya, goodness knows when. Maybe they are no
longer in this world.”


Yegor thought a little and began writing rapidly:


“At the present time”—he wrote—“since your destiny through
your own doing allotted you to the Military Career, we counsel you to look
into the Code of Disciplinary Offences and Fundamental Laws of the War
Office, and you will see in that law the Civilization of the Officials of
the War Office.”


He wrote and kept reading aloud what was written, while Vasilisa
considered what she ought to write: how great had been their want the year
before, how their corn had not lasted even till Christmas, how they had to
sell their cow. She ought to ask for money, ought to write that the old
father was often ailing and would soon no doubt give up his soul to God...
but how to express this in words? What must be said first and what
afterwards?


“Take note,” Yegor went on writing, “in volume five of the Army
Regulations soldier is a common noun and a proper one, a soldier of the
first rank is called a general, and of the last a private....”


The old man stirred his lips and said softly:


“It would be all right to have a look at the grandchildren.”


“What grandchildren?” asked the old woman, and she looked angrily at him;
“perhaps there are none.”


“Well, but perhaps there are. Who knows?”


“And thereby you can judge,” Yegor hurried on, “what is the enemy without
and what is the enemy within. The foremost of our enemies within is
Bacchus.” The pen squeaked, executing upon the paper flourishes like
fish-hooks. Yegor hastened and read over every line several times. He sat
on a stool sprawling his broad feet under the table, well-fed, bursting
with health, with a coarse animal face and a red bull neck. He was
vulgarity itself: coarse, conceited, invincible, proud of having been born
and bred in a pot-house; and Vasilisa quite understood the vulgarity, but
could not express it in words, and could only look angrily and
suspiciously at Yegor. Her head was beginning to ache, and her thoughts
were in confusion from the sound of his voice and his unintelligible
words, from the heat and the stuffiness, and she said nothing and thought
nothing, but simply waited for him to finish scribbling. But the old man
looked with full confidence. He believed in his old woman who had brought
him there, and in Yegor; and when he had mentioned the hydropathic
establishment it could be seen that he believed in the establishment and
the healing efficacy of water.


Having finished the letter, Yegor got up and read the whole of it through
from the beginning. The old man did not understand, but he nodded his head
trustfully.


“That’s all right; it is smooth...” he said. “God give you health. That’s
all right....”


They laid on the table three five-kopeck pieces and went out of the
tavern; the old man looked immovably straight before him as though he were
blind, and perfect trustfulness was written on his face; but as Vasilisa
came out of the tavern she waved angrily at the dog, and said angrily:


“Ugh, the plague.”


The old woman did not sleep all night; she was disturbed by thoughts, and
at daybreak she got up, said her prayers, and went to the station to send
off the letter.


It was between eight and nine miles to the station.


II


Dr. B. O. Mozelweiser’s hydropathic establishment worked on New Year’s Day
exactly as on ordinary days; the only difference was that the porter,
Andrey Hrisanfitch, had on a uniform with new braiding, his boots had an
extra polish, and he greeted every visitor with “A Happy New Year to you!”


It was the morning; Andrey Hrisanfitch was standing at the door, reading
the newspaper. Just at ten o’clock there arrived a general, one of the
habitual visitors, and directly after him the postman; Andrey Hrisanfitch
helped the general off with his great-coat, and said:


“A Happy New Year to your Excellency!”


“Thank you, my good fellow; the same to you.”


And at the top of the stairs the general asked, nodding towards the door
(he asked the same question every day and always forgot the answer):


“And what is there in that room?”


“The massage room, your Excellency.”


When the general’s steps had died away Andrey Hrisanfitch looked at the
post that had come, and found one addressed to himself. He tore it open,
read several lines, then, looking at the newspaper, he walked without
haste to his own room, which was downstairs close by at the end of the
passage. His wife Yefimya was sitting on the bed, feeding her baby;
another child, the eldest, was standing by, laying its curly head on her
knee; a third was asleep on the bed.


Going into the room, Andrey gave his wife the letter and said:


“From the country, I suppose.”


Then he walked out again without taking his eyes from the paper. He could
hear Yefimya with a shaking voice reading the first lines. She read them
and could read no more; these lines were enough for her. She burst into
tears, and hugging her eldest child, kissing him, she began saying—and
it was hard to say whether she were laughing or crying:


“It’s from granny, from grandfather,” she said. “From the country.... The
Heavenly Mother, Saints and Martyrs! The snow lies heaped up under the
roofs now... the trees are as white as white. The boys slide on little
sledges... and dear old bald grandfather is on the stove... and there is a
little yellow dog.... My own darlings!”


Andrey Hrisanfitch, hearing this, recalled that his wife had on three or
four occasions given him letters and asked him to send them to the
country, but some important business had always prevented him; he had not
sent them, and the letters somehow got lost.


“And little hares run about in the fields,” Yefimya went on chanting,
kissing her boy and shedding tears. “Grandfather is kind and gentle;
granny is good, too—kind-hearted. They are warm-hearted in the
country, they are God-fearing... and there is a little church in the
village; the peasants sing in the choir. Queen of Heaven, Holy Mother and
Defender, take us away from here!”


Andrey Hrisanfitch returned to his room to smoke a little till there was
another ring at the door, and Yefimya ceased speaking, subsided, and wiped
her eyes, though her lips were still quivering. She was very much
frightened of him—oh, how frightened of him! She trembled and was
reduced to terror by the sound of his steps, by the look in his eyes, and
dared not utter a word in his presence.


Andrey Hrisanfitch lighted a cigarette, but at that very moment there was
a ring from upstairs. He put out his cigarette, and, assuming a very grave
face, hastened to his front door.


The general was coming downstairs, fresh and rosy from his bath.


“And what is there in that room?” he asked, pointing to a door.


Andrey Hrisanfitch put his hands down swiftly to the seams of his
trousers, and pronounced loudly:


“Charcot douche, your Excellency!”








GUSEV


I

IT was getting dark; it would soon be night.


Gusev, a discharged soldier, sat up in his hammock and said in an
undertone:


“I say, Pavel Ivanitch. A soldier at Sutchan told me: while they were
sailing a big fish came into collision with their ship and stove a hole in
it.”


The nondescript individual whom he was addressing, and whom everyone in
the ship’s hospital called Pavel Ivanitch, was silent, as though he had
not heard.


And again a stillness followed... The wind frolicked with the rigging, the
screw throbbed, the waves lashed, the hammocks creaked, but the ear had
long ago become accustomed to these sounds, and it seemed that everything
around was asleep and silent. It was dreary. The three invalids—two
soldiers and a sailor—who had been playing cards all the day were
asleep and talking in their dreams.


It seemed as though the ship were beginning to rock. The hammock slowly
rose and fell under Gusev, as though it were heaving a sigh, and this was
repeated once, twice, three times.... Something crashed on to the floor
with a clang: it must have been a jug falling down.


“The wind has broken loose from its chain...” said Gusev, listening.


This time Pavel Ivanitch cleared his throat and answered irritably:


“One minute a vessel’s running into a fish, the next, the wind’s breaking
loose from its chain. Is the wind a beast that it can break loose from its
chain?”


“That’s how christened folk talk.”


“They are as ignorant as you are then. They say all sorts of things. One
must keep a head on one’s shoulders and use one’s reason. You are a
senseless creature.”


Pavel Ivanitch was subject to sea-sickness. When the sea was rough he was
usually ill-humoured, and the merest trifle would make him irritable. And
in Gusev’s opinion there was absolutely nothing to be vexed about. What
was there strange or wonderful, for instance, in the fish or in the wind’s
breaking loose from its chain? Suppose the fish were as big as a mountain
and its back were as hard as a sturgeon: and in the same way, supposing
that away yonder at the end of the world there stood great stone walls and
the fierce winds were chained up to the walls... if they had not broken
loose, why did they tear about all over the sea like maniacs, and struggle
to escape like dogs? If they were not chained up, what did become of them
when it was calm?


Gusev pondered for a long time about fishes as big as a mountain and
stout, rusty chains, then he began to feel dull and thought of his native
place to which he was returning after five years’ service in the East. He
pictured an immense pond covered with snow.... On one side of the pond the
red-brick building of the potteries with a tall chimney and clouds of
black smoke; on the other side—a village.... His brother Alexey
comes out in a sledge from the fifth yard from the end; behind him sits
his little son Vanka in big felt over-boots, and his little girl Akulka,
also in big felt boots. Alexey has been drinking, Vanka is laughing,
Akulka’s face he could not see, she had muffled herself up.


“You never know, he’ll get the children frozen...” thought Gusev. “Lord
send them sense and judgment that they may honour their father and mother
and not be wiser than their parents.”


“They want re-soleing,” a delirious sailor says in a bass voice. “Yes,
yes!”


Gusev’s thoughts break off, and instead of a pond there suddenly appears
apropos of nothing a huge bull’s head without eyes, and the horse and
sledge are not driving along, but are whirling round and round in a cloud
of smoke. But still he was glad he had seen his own folks. He held his
breath from delight, shudders ran all over him, and his fingers twitched.


“The Lord let us meet again,” he muttered feverishly, but he at once
opened his eyes and sought in the darkness for water.


He drank and lay back, and again the sledge was moving, then again the
bull’s head without eyes, smoke, clouds.... And so on till daybreak.


II


The first outline visible in the darkness was a blue circle—the
little round window; then little by little Gusev could distinguish his
neighbour in the next hammock, Pavel Ivanitch. The man slept sitting up,
as he could not breathe lying down. His face was grey, his nose was long
and sharp, his eyes looked huge from the terrible thinness of his face,
his temples were sunken, his beard was skimpy, his hair was long....
Looking at him you could not make out of what class he was, whether he
were a gentleman, a merchant, or a peasant. Judging from his expression
and his long hair he might have been a hermit or a lay brother in a
monastery—but if one listened to what he said it seemed that he
could not be a monk. He was worn out by his cough and his illness and by
the stifling heat, and breathed with difficulty, moving his parched lips.
Noticing that Gusev was looking at him he turned his face towards him and
said:


“I begin to guess.... Yes.... I understand it all perfectly now.”


“What do you understand, Pavel Ivanitch?”


“I’ll tell you.... It has always seemed to me strange that terribly ill as
you are you should be here in a steamer where it is so hot and stifling
and we are always being tossed up and down, where, in fact, everything
threatens you with death; now it is all clear to me.... Yes.... Your
doctors put you on the steamer to get rid of you. They get sick of looking
after poor brutes like you.... You don’t pay them anything, they have a
bother with you, and you damage their records with your deaths—so,
of course, you are brutes! It’s not difficult to get rid of you.... All
that is necessary is, in the first place, to have no conscience or
humanity, and, secondly, to deceive the steamer authorities. The first
condition need hardly be considered, in that respect we are artists; and
one can always succeed in the second with a little practice. In a crowd of
four hundred healthy soldiers and sailors half a dozen sick ones are not
conspicuous; well, they drove you all on to the steamer, mixed you with
the healthy ones, hurriedly counted you over, and in the confusion nothing
amiss was noticed, and when the steamer had started they saw that there
were paralytics and consumptives in the last stage lying about on the
deck....”


Gusev did not understand Pavel Ivanitch; but supposing he was being
blamed, he said in self-defence:


“I lay on the deck because I had not the strength to stand; when we were
unloaded from the barge on to the ship I caught a fearful chill.”


“It’s revolting,” Pavel Ivanitch went on. “The worst of it is they know
perfectly well that you can’t last out the long journey, and yet they put
you here. Supposing you get as far as the Indian Ocean, what then? It’s
horrible to think of it.... And that’s their gratitude for your faithful,
irreproachable service!”


Pavel Ivanitch’s eyes looked angry; he frowned contemptuously and said,
gasping:


“Those are the people who ought to be plucked in the newspapers till the
feathers fly in all directions.”


The two sick soldiers and the sailor were awake and already playing cards.
The sailor was half reclining in his hammock, the soldiers were sitting
near him on the floor in the most uncomfortable attitudes. One of the
soldiers had his right arm in a sling, and the hand was swathed up in a
regular bundle so that he held his cards under his right arm or in the
crook of his elbow while he played with the left. The ship was rolling
heavily. They could not stand up, nor drink tea, nor take their medicines.


“Were you an officer’s servant?” Pavel Ivanitch asked Gusev.


“Yes, an officer’s servant.”


“My God, my God!” said Pavel Ivanitch, and he shook his head mournfully.
“To tear a man out of his home, drag him twelve thousand miles away, then
to drive him into consumption and... and what is it all for, one wonders?
To turn him into a servant for some Captain Kopeikin or midshipman Dirka!
How logical!”


“It’s not hard work, Pavel Ivanitch. You get up in the morning and clean
the boots, get the samovar, sweep the rooms, and then you have nothing
more to do. The lieutenant is all the day drawing plans, and if you like
you can say your prayers, if you like you can read a book or go out into
the street. God grant everyone such a life.”


“Yes, very nice, the lieutenant draws plans all the day and you sit in the
kitchen and pine for home.... Plans indeed!... It is not plans that
matter, but a human life. Life is not given twice, it must be treated
mercifully.”


“Of course, Pavel Ivanitch, a bad man gets no mercy anywhere, neither at
home nor in the army, but if you live as you ought and obey orders, who
has any need to insult you? The officers are educated gentlemen, they
understand.... In five years I was never once in prison, and I was never
struck a blow, so help me God, but once.”


“What for?”


“For fighting. I have a heavy hand, Pavel Ivanitch. Four Chinamen came
into our yard; they were bringing firewood or something, I don’t remember.
Well, I was bored and I knocked them about a bit, one’s nose began
bleeding, damn the fellow.... The lieutenant saw it through the little
window, he was angry and gave me a box on the ear.”


“Foolish, pitiful man...” whispered Pavel Ivanitch. “You don’t understand
anything.”


He was utterly exhausted by the tossing of the ship and closed his eyes;
his head alternately fell back and dropped forward on his breast. Several
times he tried to lie down but nothing came of it; his difficulty in
breathing prevented it.


“And what did you hit the four Chinamen for?” he asked a little while
afterwards.


“Oh, nothing. They came into the yard and I hit them.”


And a stillness followed.... The card-players had been playing for two
hours with enthusiasm and loud abuse of one another, but the motion of the
ship overcame them, too; they threw aside the cards and lay down. Again
Gusev saw the big pond, the brick building, the village.... Again the
sledge was coming along, again Vanka was laughing and Akulka, silly little
thing, threw open her fur coat and stuck her feet out, as much as to say:
“Look, good people, my snowboots are not like Vanka’s, they are new ones.”


“Five years old, and she has no sense yet,” Gusev muttered in delirium.
“Instead of kicking your legs you had better come and get your soldier
uncle a drink. I will give you something nice.”


Then Andron with a flintlock gun on his shoulder was carrying a hare he
had killed, and he was followed by the decrepit old Jew Isaitchik, who
offers to barter the hare for a piece of soap; then the black calf in the
shed, then Domna sewing at a shirt and crying about something, and then
again the bull’s head without eyes, black smoke....


Overhead someone gave a loud shout, several sailors ran by, they seemed to
be dragging something bulky over the deck, something fell with a crash.
Again they ran by.... Had something gone wrong? Gusev raised his head,
listened, and saw that the two soldiers and the sailor were playing cards
again; Pavel Ivanitch was sitting up moving his lips. It was stifling, one
hadn’t strength to breathe, one was thirsty, the water was warm,
disgusting. The ship heaved as much as ever.


Suddenly something strange happened to one of the soldiers playing
cards.... He called hearts diamonds, got muddled in his score, and dropped
his cards, then with a frightened, foolish smile looked round at all of
them.


“I shan’t be a minute, mates, I’ll...” he said, and lay down on the floor.


Everybody was amazed. They called to him, he did not answer.


“Stephan, maybe you are feeling bad, eh?” the soldier with his arm in a
sling asked him. “Perhaps we had better bring the priest, eh?”


“Have a drink of water, Stepan...” said the sailor. “Here, lad, drink.”


“Why are you knocking the jug against his teeth?” said Gusev angrily.
“Don’t you see, turnip head?”


“What?”


“What?” Gusev repeated, mimicking him. “There is no breath in him, he is
dead! That’s what! What nonsensical people, Lord have mercy on us...!”


III


The ship was not rocking and Pavel Ivanitch was more cheerful. He was no
longer ill-humoured. His face had a boastful, defiant, mocking expression.
He looked as though he wanted to say: “Yes, in a minute I will tell you
something that will make you split your sides with laughing.” The little
round window was open and a soft breeze was blowing on Pavel Ivanitch.
There was a sound of voices, of the plash of oars in the water.... Just
under the little window someone began droning in a high, unpleasant voice:
no doubt it was a Chinaman singing.


“Here we are in the harbour,” said Pavel Ivanitch, smiling ironically.
“Only another month and we shall be in Russia. Well, worthy gentlemen and
warriors! I shall arrive at Odessa and from there go straight to Harkov.
In Harkov I have a friend, a literary man. I shall go to him and say,
‘Come, old man, put aside your horrid subjects, ladies’ amours and the
beauties of nature, and show up human depravity.’”


For a minute he pondered, then said:


“Gusev, do you know how I took them in?”


“Took in whom, Pavel Ivanitch?”


“Why, these fellows.... You know that on this steamer there is only a
first-class and a third-class, and they only allow peasants—that is
the rift-raft—to go in the third. If you have got on a reefer jacket
and have the faintest resemblance to a gentleman or a bourgeois you must
go first-class, if you please. You must fork out five hundred roubles if
you die for it. Why, I ask, have you made such a rule? Do you want to
raise the prestige of educated Russians thereby? Not a bit of it. We don’t
let you go third-class simply because a decent person can’t go
third-class; it is very horrible and disgusting. Yes, indeed. I am very
grateful for such solicitude for decent people’s welfare. But in any case,
whether it is nasty there or nice, five hundred roubles I haven’t got. I
haven’t pilfered government money. I haven’t exploited the natives, I
haven’t trafficked in contraband, I have flogged no one to death, so judge
whether I have the right to travel first-class and even less to reckon
myself of the educated class? But you won’t catch them with logic.... One
has to resort to deception. I put on a workman’s coat and high boots, I
assumed a drunken, servile mug and went to the agents: ‘Give us a little
ticket, your honour,’ said I....”


“Why, what class do you belong to?” asked a sailor.


“Clerical. My father was an honest priest, he always told the great ones
of the world the truth to their faces; and he had a great deal to put up
with in consequence.”


Pavel Ivanitch was exhausted with talking and gasped for breath, but still
went on:


“Yes, I always tell people the truth to their faces. I am not afraid of
anyone or anything. There is a vast difference between me and all of you
in that respect. You are in darkness, you are blind, crushed; you see
nothing and what you do see you don’t understand.... You are told the wind
breaks loose from its chain, that you are beasts, Petchenyegs, and you
believe it; they punch you in the neck, you kiss their hands; some animal
in a sable-lined coat robs you and then tips you fifteen kopecks and you:
‘Let me kiss your hand, sir.’ You are pariahs, pitiful people.... I am a
different sort. My eyes are open, I see it all as clearly as a hawk or an
eagle when it floats over the earth, and I understand it all. I am a
living protest. I see irresponsible tyranny—I protest. I see cant
and hypocrisy—I protest. I see swine triumphant—I protest. And
I cannot be suppressed, no Spanish Inquisition can make me hold my tongue.
No.... Cut out my tongue and I would protest in dumb show; shut me up in a
cellar—I will shout from it to be heard half a mile away, or I will
starve myself to death that they may have another weight on their black
consciences. Kill me and I will haunt them with my ghost. All my
acquaintances say to me: ‘You are a most insufferable person, Pavel
Ivanitch.’ I am proud of such a reputation. I have served three years in
the far East, and I shall be remembered there for a hundred years: I had
rows with everyone. My friends write to me from Russia, ‘Don’t come back,’
but here I am going back to spite them... yes.... That is life as I
understand it. That is what one can call life.”


Gusev was looking at the little window and was not listening. A boat was
swaying on the transparent, soft, turquoise water all bathed in hot,
dazzling sunshine. In it there were naked Chinamen holding up cages with
canaries and calling out:


“It sings, it sings!”


Another boat knocked against the first; the steam cutter darted by. And
then there came another boat with a fat Chinaman sitting in it, eating
rice with little sticks.


Languidly the water heaved, languidly the white seagulls floated over it.


“I should like to give that fat fellow one in the neck,” thought Gusev,
gazing at the stout Chinaman, with a yawn.


He dozed off, and it seemed to him that all nature was dozing, too. Time
flew swiftly by; imperceptibly the day passed, imperceptibly the darkness
came on.... The steamer was no longer standing still, but moving on
further.


IV


Two days passed, Pavel Ivanitch lay down instead of sitting up; his eyes
were closed, his nose seemed to have grown sharper.


“Pavel Ivanitch,” Gusev called to him. “Hey, Pavel Ivanitch.”


Pavel Ivanitch opened his eyes and moved his lips.


“Are you feeling bad?”


“No... it’s nothing...” answered Pavel Ivanitch, gasping. “Nothing; on the
contrary—I am rather better.... You see I can lie down. I am a
little easier....”


“Well, thank God for that, Pavel Ivanitch.”


“When I compare myself with you I am sorry for you... poor fellow. My
lungs are all right, it is only a stomach cough.... I can stand hell, let
alone the Red Sea. Besides I take a critical attitude to my illness and to
the medicines they give me for it. While you... you are in darkness....
It’s hard for you, very, very hard!”


The ship was not rolling, it was calm, but as hot and stifling as a
bath-house; it was not only hard to speak but even hard to listen. Gusev
hugged his knees, laid his head on them and thought of his home. Good
heavens, what a relief it was to think of snow and cold in that stifling
heat! You drive in a sledge, all at once the horses take fright at
something and bolt.... Regardless of the road, the ditches, the ravines,
they dash like mad things, right through the village, over the pond by the
pottery works, out across the open fields. “Hold on,” the pottery hands
and the peasants shout, meeting them. “Hold on.” But why? Let the keen,
cold wind beat in one’s face and bite one’s hands; let the lumps of snow,
kicked up by the horses’ hoofs, fall on one’s cap, on one’s back, down
one’s collar, on one’s chest; let the runners ring on the snow, and the
traces and the sledge be smashed, deuce take them one and all! And how
delightful when the sledge upsets and you go flying full tilt into a
drift, face downwards in the snow, and then you get up white all over with
icicles on your moustaches; no cap, no gloves, your belt undone.... People
laugh, the dogs bark....


Pavel Ivanitch half opened one eye, looked at Gusev with it, and asked
softly:


“Gusev, did your commanding officer steal?”


“Who can tell, Pavel Ivanitch! We can’t say, it didn’t reach us.”


And after that a long time passed in silence. Gusev brooded, muttered
something in delirium, and kept drinking water; it was hard for him to
talk and hard to listen, and he was afraid of being talked to. An hour
passed, a second, a third; evening came on, then night, but he did not
notice it. He still sat dreaming of the frost.


There was a sound as though someone came into the hospital, and voices
were audible, but a few minutes passed and all was still again.


“The Kingdom of Heaven and eternal peace,” said the soldier with his arm
in a sling. “He was an uncomfortable man.”


“What?” asked Gusev. “Who?”


“He is dead, they have just carried him up.”


“Oh, well,” muttered Gusev, yawning, “the Kingdom of Heaven be his.”


“What do you think?” the soldier with his arm in a sling asked Gusev.
“Will he be in the Kingdom of Heaven or not?”


“Who is it you are talking about?”


“Pavel Ivanitch.”


“He will be... he suffered so long. And there is another thing, he
belonged to the clergy, and the priests always have a lot of relations.
Their prayers will save him.”


The soldier with the sling sat down on a hammock near Gusev and said in an
undertone:


“And you, Gusev, are not long for this world. You will never get to
Russia.”


“Did the doctor or his assistant say so?” asked Gusev.


“It isn’t that they said so, but one can see it.... One can see directly
when a man’s going to die. You don’t eat, you don’t drink; it’s dreadful
to see how thin you’ve got. It’s consumption, in fact. I say it, not to
upset you, but because maybe you would like to have the sacrament and
extreme unction. And if you have any money you had better give it to the
senior officer.”


“I haven’t written home...” Gusev sighed. “I shall die and they won’t
know.”


“They’ll hear of it,” the sick sailor brought out in a bass voice. “When
you die they will put it down in the Gazette, at Odessa they will
send in a report to the commanding officer there and he will send it to
the parish or somewhere....”


Gusev began to be uneasy after such a conversation and to feel a vague
yearning. He drank water—it was not that; he dragged himself to the
window and breathed the hot, moist air—it was not that; he tried to
think of home, of the frost—it was not that.... At last it seemed to
him one minute longer in the ward and he would certainly expire.


“It’s stifling, mates...” he said. “I’ll go on deck. Help me up, for
Christ’s sake.”


“All right,” assented the soldier with the sling. “I’ll carry you, you
can’t walk, hold on to my neck.”


Gusev put his arm round the soldier’s neck, the latter put his unhurt arm
round him and carried him up. On the deck sailors and time-expired
soldiers were lying asleep side by side; there were so many of them it was
difficult to pass.


“Stand down,” the soldier with the sling said softly. “Follow me quietly,
hold on to my shirt....”


It was dark. There was no light on deck, nor on the masts, nor anywhere on
the sea around. At the furthest end of the ship the man on watch was
standing perfectly still like a statue, and it looked as though he were
asleep. It seemed as though the steamer were abandoned to itself and were
going at its own will.


“Now they will throw Pavel Ivanitch into the sea,” said the soldier with
the sling. “In a sack and then into the water.”


“Yes, that’s the rule.”


“But it’s better to lie at home in the earth. Anyway, your mother comes to
the grave and weeps.”


“Of course.”


There was a smell of hay and of dung. There were oxen standing with
drooping heads by the ship’s rail. One, two, three; eight of them! And
there was a little horse. Gusev put out his hand to stroke it, but it
shook its head, showed its teeth, and tried to bite his sleeve.


“Damned brute...” said Gusev angrily.


The two of them, he and the soldier, threaded their way to the head of the
ship, then stood at the rail and looked up and down. Overhead deep sky,
bright stars, peace and stillness, exactly as at home in the village,
below darkness and disorder. The tall waves were resounding, no one could
tell why. Whichever wave you looked at each one was trying to rise higher
than all the rest and to chase and crush the next one; after it a third as
fierce and hideous flew noisily, with a glint of light on its white crest.


The sea has no sense and no pity. If the steamer had been smaller and not
made of thick iron, the waves would have crushed it to pieces without the
slightest compunction, and would have devoured all the people in it with
no distinction of saints or sinners. The steamer had the same cruel and
meaningless expression. This monster with its huge beak was dashing
onwards, cutting millions of waves in its path; it had no fear of the
darkness nor the wind, nor of space, nor of solitude, caring for nothing,
and if the ocean had its people, this monster would have crushed them,
too, without distinction of saints or sinners.


“Where are we now?” asked Gusev.


“I don’t know. We must be in the ocean.”


“There is no sight of land...”


“No indeed! They say we shan’t see it for seven days.”


The two soldiers watched the white foam with the phosphorus light on it
and were silent, thinking. Gusev was the first to break the silence.


“There is nothing to be afraid of,” he said, “only one is full of dread as
though one were sitting in a dark forest; but if, for instance, they let a
boat down on to the water this minute and an officer ordered me to go a
hundred miles over the sea to catch fish, I’d go. Or, let’s say, if a
Christian were to fall into the water this minute, I’d go in after him. A
German or a Chinaman I wouldn’t save, but I’d go in after a Christian.”


“And are you afraid to die?”


“Yes. I am sorry for the folks at home. My brother at home, you know,
isn’t steady; he drinks, he beats his wife for nothing, he does not honour
his parents. Everything will go to ruin without me, and father and my old
mother will be begging their bread, I shouldn’t wonder. But my legs won’t
bear me, brother, and it’s hot here. Let’s go to sleep.”


V


Gusev went back to the ward and got into his hammock. He was again
tormented by a vague craving, and he could not make out what he wanted.
There was an oppression on his chest, a throbbing in his head, his mouth
was so dry that it was difficult for him to move his tongue. He dozed, and
murmured in his sleep, and, worn out with nightmares, his cough, and the
stifling heat, towards morning he fell into a sound sleep. He dreamed that
they were just taking the bread out of the oven in the barracks and he
climbed into the stove and had a steam bath in it, lashing himself with a
bunch of birch twigs. He slept for two days, and at midday on the third
two sailors came down and carried him out.


He was sewn up in sailcloth and to make him heavier they put with him two
iron weights. Sewn up in the sailcloth he looked like a carrot or a
radish: broad at the head and narrow at the feet.... Before sunset they
brought him up to the deck and put him on a plank; one end of the plank
lay on the side of the ship, the other on a box, placed on a stool. Round
him stood the soldiers and the officers with their caps off.


“Blessed be the Name of the Lord...” the priest began. “As it was in the
beginning, is now, and ever shall be.”


“Amen,” chanted three sailors.


The soldiers and the officers crossed themselves and looked away at the
waves. It was strange that a man should be sewn up in sailcloth and should
soon be flying into the sea. Was it possible that such a thing might
happen to anyone?


The priest strewed earth upon Gusev and bowed down. They sang “Eternal
Memory.”


The man on watch duty tilted up the end of the plank, Gusev slid off and
flew head foremost, turned a somersault in the air and splashed into the
sea. He was covered with foam and for a moment looked as though he were
wrapped in lace, but the minute passed and he disappeared in the waves.


He went rapidly towards the bottom. Did he reach it? It was said to be
three miles to the bottom. After sinking sixty or seventy feet, he began
moving more and more slowly, swaying rhythmically, as though he were
hesitating and, carried along by the current, moved more rapidly sideways
than downwards.


Then he was met by a shoal of the fish called harbour pilots. Seeing the
dark body the fish stopped as though petrified, and suddenly turned round
and disappeared. In less than a minute they flew back swift as an arrow to
Gusev, and began zig-zagging round him in the water.


After that another dark body appeared. It was a shark. It swam under Gusev
with dignity and no show of interest, as though it did not notice him, and
sank down upon its back, then it turned belly upwards, basking in the
warm, transparent water and languidly opened its jaws with two rows of
teeth. The harbour pilots are delighted, they stop to see what will come
next. After playing a little with the body the shark nonchalantly puts its
jaws under it, cautiously touches it with its teeth, and the sailcloth is
rent its full length from head to foot; one of the weights falls out and
frightens the harbour pilots, and striking the shark on the ribs goes
rapidly to the bottom.


Overhead at this time the clouds are massed together on the side where the
sun is setting; one cloud like a triumphal arch, another like a lion, a
third like a pair of scissors.... From behind the clouds a broad, green
shaft of light pierces through and stretches to the middle of the sky; a
little later another, violet-coloured, lies beside it; next that, one of
gold, then one rose-coloured.... The sky turns a soft lilac. Looking at
this gorgeous, enchanted sky, at first the ocean scowls, but soon it, too,
takes tender, joyous, passionate colours for which it is hard to find a
name in human speech.








THE STUDENT

AT first the weather was fine and still. The thrushes were calling, and in
the swamps close by something alive droned pitifully with a sound like
blowing into an empty bottle. A snipe flew by, and the shot aimed at it
rang out with a gay, resounding note in the spring air. But when it began
to get dark in the forest a cold, penetrating wind blew inappropriately
from the east, and everything sank into silence. Needles of ice stretched
across the pools, and it felt cheerless, remote, and lonely in the forest.
There was a whiff of winter.


Ivan Velikopolsky, the son of a sacristan, and a student of the clerical
academy, returning home from shooting, walked all the time by the path in
the water-side meadow. His fingers were numb and his face was burning with
the wind. It seemed to him that the cold that had suddenly come on had
destroyed the order and harmony of things, that nature itself felt ill at
ease, and that was why the evening darkness was falling more rapidly than
usual. All around it was deserted and peculiarly gloomy. The only light
was one gleaming in the widows’ gardens near the river; the village, over
three miles away, and everything in the distance all round was plunged in
the cold evening mist. The student remembered that, as he went out from
the house, his mother was sitting barefoot on the floor in the entry,
cleaning the samovar, while his father lay on the stove coughing; as it
was Good Friday nothing had been cooked, and the student was terribly
hungry. And now, shrinking from the cold, he thought that just such a wind
had blown in the days of Rurik and in the time of Ivan the Terrible and
Peter, and in their time there had been just the same desperate poverty
and hunger, the same thatched roofs with holes in them, ignorance, misery,
the same desolation around, the same darkness, the same feeling of
oppression—all these had existed, did exist, and would exist, and
the lapse of a thousand years would make life no better. And he did not
want to go home.


The gardens were called the widows’ because they were kept by two widows,
mother and daughter. A camp fire was burning brightly with a crackling
sound, throwing out light far around on the ploughed earth. The widow
Vasilisa, a tall, fat old woman in a man’s coat, was standing by and
looking thoughtfully into the fire; her daughter Lukerya, a little
pock-marked woman with a stupid-looking face, was sitting on the ground,
washing a caldron and spoons. Apparently they had just had supper. There
was a sound of men’s voices; it was the labourers watering their horses at
the river.


“Here you have winter back again,” said the student, going up to the camp
fire. “Good evening.”


Vasilisa started, but at once recognized him and smiled cordially.


“I did not know you; God bless you,” she said.


“You’ll be rich.”


They talked. Vasilisa, a woman of experience, who had been in service with
the gentry, first as a wet-nurse, afterwards as a children’s nurse,
expressed herself with refinement, and a soft, sedate smile never left her
face; her daughter Lukerya, a village peasant woman, who had been beaten
by her husband, simply screwed up her eyes at the student and said
nothing, and she had a strange expression like that of a deaf mute.


“At just such a fire the Apostle Peter warmed himself,” said the student,
stretching out his hands to the fire, “so it must have been cold then,
too. Ah, what a terrible night it must have been, granny! An utterly
dismal long night!”


He looked round at the darkness, shook his head abruptly and asked:


“No doubt you have been at the reading of the Twelve Gospels?”


“Yes, I have,” answered Vasilisa.


“If you remember at the Last Supper Peter said to Jesus, ‘I am ready to go
with Thee into darkness and unto death.’ And our Lord answered him thus:
‘I say unto thee, Peter, before the cock croweth thou wilt have denied Me
thrice.’ After the supper Jesus went through the agony of death in the
garden and prayed, and poor Peter was weary in spirit and faint, his
eyelids were heavy and he could not struggle against sleep. He fell
asleep. Then you heard how Judas the same night kissed Jesus and betrayed
Him to His tormentors. They took Him bound to the high priest and beat
Him, while Peter, exhausted, worn out with misery and alarm, hardly awake,
you know, feeling that something awful was just going to happen on earth,
followed behind.... He loved Jesus passionately, intensely, and now he saw
from far off how He was beaten...”


Lukerya left the spoons and fixed an immovable stare upon the student.


“They came to the high priest’s,” he went on; “they began to question
Jesus, and meantime the labourers made a fire in the yard as it was cold,
and warmed themselves. Peter, too, stood with them near the fire and
warmed himself as I am doing. A woman, seeing him, said: ‘He was with
Jesus, too’—that is as much as to say that he, too, should be taken
to be questioned. And all the labourers that were standing near the fire
must have looked sourly and suspiciously at him, because he was confused
and said: ‘I don’t know Him.’ A little while after again someone
recognized him as one of Jesus’ disciples and said: ‘Thou, too, art one of
them,’ but again he denied it. And for the third time someone turned to
him: ‘Why, did I not see thee with Him in the garden to-day?’ For the
third time he denied it. And immediately after that time the cock crowed,
and Peter, looking from afar off at Jesus, remembered the words He had
said to him in the evening.... He remembered, he came to himself, went out
of the yard and wept bitterly—bitterly. In the Gospel it is written:
‘He went out and wept bitterly.’ I imagine it: the still, still, dark,
dark garden, and in the stillness, faintly audible, smothered sobbing...”


T he student sighed and sank into thought. Still smiling, Vasilisa
suddenly gave a gulp, big tears flowed freely down her cheeks, and she
screened her face from the fire with her sleeve as though ashamed of her
tears, and Lukerya, staring immovably at the student, flushed crimson, and
her expression became strained and heavy like that of someone enduring
intense pain.


The labourers came back from the river, and one of them riding a horse was
quite near, and the light from the fire quivered upon him. The student
said good-night to the widows and went on. And again the darkness was
about him and his fingers began to be numb. A cruel wind was blowing,
winter really had come back and it did not feel as though Easter would be
the day after to-morrow.


Now the student was thinking about Vasilisa: since she had shed tears all
that had happened to Peter the night before the Crucifixion must have some
relation to her....


He looked round. The solitary light was still gleaming in the darkness and
no figures could be seen near it now. The student thought again that if
Vasilisa had shed tears, and her daughter had been troubled, it was
evident that what he had just been telling them about, which had happened
nineteen centuries ago, had a relation to the present—to both women,
to the desolate village, to himself, to all people. The old woman had
wept, not because he could tell the story touchingly, but because Peter
was near to her, because her whole being was interested in what was
passing in Peter’s soul.


And joy suddenly stirred in his soul, and he even stopped for a minute to
take breath. “The past,” he thought, “is Jlinked with the present by an
unbroken chain of events flowing one out of another.” And it seemed to him
that he had just seen both ends of that chain; that when he touched one
end the other quivered.


When he crossed the river by the ferry boat and afterwards, mounting the
hill, looked at his village and towards the west where the cold crimson
sunset lay a narrow streak of light, he thought that truth and beauty
which had guided human life there in the garden and in the yard of the
high priest had continued without interruption to this day, and had
evidently always been the chief thing in human life and in all earthly
life, indeed; and the feeling of youth, health, vigour—he was only
twenty-two—and the inexpressible sweet expectation of happiness, of
unknown mysterious happiness, took possession of him little by little, and
life seemed to him enchanting, marvellous, and full of lofty meaning.








IN THE RAVINE


I

THE village of Ukleevo lay in a ravine so that only the belfry and the
chimneys of the printed cottons factories could be seen from the high road
and the railway-station. When visitors asked what village this was, they
were told:


“That’s the village where the deacon ate all the caviare at the funeral.”


It had happened at the dinner at the funeral of Kostukov that the old
deacon saw among the savouries some large-grained caviare and began eating
it greedily; people nudged him, tugged at his arm, but he seemed petrified
with enjoyment: felt nothing, and only went on eating. He ate up all the
caviare, and there were four pounds in the jar. And years had passed since
then, the deacon had long been dead, but the caviare was still remembered.
Whether life was so poor here or people had not been clever enough to
notice anything but that unimportant incident that had occurred ten years
before, anyway the people had nothing else to tell about the village
Ukleevo.


The village was never free from fever, and there was boggy mud there even
in the summer, especially under the fences over which hung old
willow-trees that gave deep shade. Here there was always a smell from the
factory refuse and the acetic acid which was used in the finishing of the
cotton print.


The three cotton factories and the tanyard were not in the village itself,
but a little way off. They were small factories, and not more than four
hundred workmen were employed in all of them. The tanyard often made the
water in the little river stink; the refuse contaminated the meadows, the
peasants’ cattle suffered from Siberian plague, and orders were given that
the factory should be closed. It was considered to be closed, but went on
working in secret with the connivance of the local police officer and the
district doctor, who was paid ten roubles a month by the owner. In the
whole village there were only two decent houses built of brick with iron
roofs; one of them was the local court, in the other, a two-storied house
just opposite the church, there lived a shopkeeper from Epifan called
Grigory Petrovitch Tsybukin.


Grigory kept a grocer’s shop, but that was only for appearance’ sake: in
reality he sold vodka, cattle, hides, grain, and pigs; he traded in
anything that came to hand, and when, for instance, magpies were wanted
abroad for ladies’ hats, he made some thirty kopecks on every pair of
birds; he bought timber for felling, lent money at interest, and
altogether was a sharp old man, full of resources.


He had two sons. The elder, Anisim, was in the police in the detective
department and was rarely at home. The younger, Stepan, had gone in for
trade and helped his father: but no great help was expected from him as he
was weak in health and deaf; his wife Aksinya, a handsome woman with a
good figure, who wore a hat and carried a parasol on holidays, got up
early and went to bed late, and ran about all day long, picking up her
skirts and jingling her keys, going from the granary to the cellar and
from there to the shop, and old Tsybukin looked at her good-humouredly
while his eyes glowed, and at such moments he regretted she had not been
married to his elder son instead of to the younger one, who was deaf, and
who evidently knew very little about female beauty.


The old man had always an inclination for family life, and he loved his
family more than anything on earth, especially his elder son, the
detective, and his daughter-in-law. Aksinya had no sooner married the deaf
son than she began to display an extraordinary gift for business, and knew
who could be allowed to run up a bill and who could not: she kept the keys
and would not trust them even to her husband; she kept the accounts by
means of the reckoning beads, looked at the horses’ teeth like a peasant,
and was always laughing or shouting; and whatever she did or said the old
man was simply delighted and muttered:


“Well done, daughter-in-law! You are a smart wench!”


He was a widower, but a year after his son’s marriage he could not resist
getting married himself. A girl was found for him, living twenty miles
from Ukleevo, called Varvara Nikolaevna, no longer quite young, but
good-looking, comely, and belonging to a decent family. As soon as she was
installed into the upper-storey room everything in the house seemed to
brighten up as though new glass had been put into all the windows. The
lamps gleamed before the ikons, the tables were covered with snow-white
cloths, flowers with red buds made their appearance in the windows and in
the front garden, and at dinner, instead of eating from a single bowl,
each person had a separate plate set for him. Varvara Nikolaevna had a
pleasant, friendly smile, and it seemed as though the whole house were
smiling, too. Beggars and pilgrims, male and female, began to come into
the yard, a thing which had never happened in the past; the plaintive
sing-song voices of the Ukleevo peasant women and the apologetic coughs of
weak, seedy-looking men, who had been dismissed from the factory for
drunkenness were heard under the windows. Varvara helped them with money,
with bread, with old clothes, and afterwards, when she felt more at home,
began taking things out of the shop. One day the deaf man saw her take
four ounces of tea and that disturbed him.


“Here, mother’s taken four ounces of tea,” he informed his father
afterwards; “where is that to be entered?”


The old man made no reply but stood still and thought a moment, moving his
eyebrows, and then went upstairs to his wife.


“Varvarushka, if you want anything out of the shop,” he said
affectionately, “take it, my dear. Take it and welcome; don’t hesitate.”


And the next day the deaf man, running across the yard, called to her:


“If there is anything you want, mother, take it.”


There was something new, something gay and light-hearted in her giving of
alms, just as there was in the lamps before the ikons and in the red
flowers. When at Carnival or at the church festival, which lasted for
three days, they sold the peasants tainted salt meat, smelling so strong
it was hard to stand near the tub of it, and took scythes, caps, and their
wives’ kerchiefs in pledge from the drunken men; when the factory hands
stupefied with bad vodka lay rolling in the mud, and sin seemed to hover
thick like a fog in the air, then it was a relief to think that up there
in the house there was a gentle, neatly dressed woman who had nothing to
do with salt meat or vodka; her charity had in those burdensome, murky
days the effect of a safety valve in a machine.


The days in Tsybukin’s house were spent in business cares. Before the sun
had risen in the morning Aksinya was panting and puffing as she washed in
the outer room, and the samovar was boiling in the kitchen with a hum that
boded no good. Old Grigory Petrovitch, dressed in a long black coat,
cotton breeches and shiny top boots, looking a dapper little figure,
walked about the rooms, tapping with his little heels like the
father-in-law in a well-known song. The shop was opened. When it was
daylight a racing droshky was brought up to the front door and the old man
got jauntily on to it, pulling his big cap down to his ears; and, looking
at him, no one would have said he was fifty-six. His wife and
daughter-in-law saw him off, and at such times when he had on a good,
clean coat, and had in the droshky a huge black horse that had cost three
hundred roubles, the old man did not like the peasants to come up to him
with their complaints and petitions; he hated the peasants and disdained
them, and if he saw some peasants waiting at the gate, he would shout
angrily:


“Why are you standing there? Go further off.”


Or if it were a beggar, he would say:


“God will provide!”


He used to drive off on business; his wife, in a dark dress and a black
apron, tidied the rooms or helped in the kitchen. Aksinya attended to the
shop, and from the yard could be heard the cJlink of bottles and of money,
her laughter and loud talk, and the anger of customers whom she had
offended; and at the same time it could be seen that the secret sale of
vodka was already going on in the shop. The deaf man sat in the shop, too,
or walked about the street bare-headed, with his hands in his pockets
looking absent-mindedly now at the huts, now at the sky overhead. Six
times a day they had tea; four times a day they sat down to meals; and in
the evening they counted over their takings, put them down, went to bed,
and slept soundly.


All the three cotton factories in Ukleevo and the houses of the factory
owners—Hrymin Seniors, Hrymin Juniors, and Kostukov—were on a
telephone. The telephone was laid on in the local court, too, but it soon
ceased to work as bugs and beetles bred there. The elder of the rural
district had had little education and wrote every word in the official
documents in capitals. But when the telephone was spoiled he said:


“Yes, now we shall be badly off without a telephone.”


The Hrymin Seniors were continually at law with the Juniors, and sometimes
the Juniors quarrelled among themselves and began going to law, and their
factory did not work for a month or two till they were reconciled again,
and this was an entertainment for the people of Ukleevo, as there was a
great deal of talk and gossip on the occasion of each quarrel. On holidays
Kostukov and the Juniors used to get up races, used to dash about Ukleevo
and run over calves. Aksinya, rustling her starched petticoats, used to
promenade in a low-necked dress up and down the street near her shop; the
Juniors used to snatch her up and carry her off as though by force. Then
old Tsybukin would drive out to show his new horse and take Varvara with
him.


In the evening, after the races, when people were going to bed, an
expensive concertina was played in the Juniors’ yard and, if it were a
moonlight night, those sounds sent a thrill of delight to the heart, and
Ukleevo no longer seemed a wretched hole.


II


The elder son Anisim came home very rarely, only on great holidays, but he
often sent by a returning villager presents and letters written in very
good writing by some other hand, always on a sheet of foolscap in the form
of a petition. The letters were full of expressions that Anisim never made
use of in conversation: “Dear papa and mamma, I send you a pound of flower
tea for the satisfaction of your physical needs.”


At the bottom of every letter was scratched, as though with a broken pen:
“Anisim Tsybukin,” and again in the same excellent hand: “Agent.”


The letters were read aloud several times, and the old father, touched,
red with emotion, would say:


“Here he did not care to stay at home, he has gone in for an intellectual
line. Well, let him! Every man to his own job!”


It happened just before Carnival there was a heavy storm of rain mixed
with hail; the old man and Varvara went to the window to look at it, and
lo and behold! Anisim drove up in a sledge from the station. He was quite
unexpected. He came indoors, looking anxious and troubled about something,
and he remained the same all the time; there was something free and easy
in his manner. He was in no haste to go away, it seemed, as though he had
been dismissed from the service. Varvara was pleased at his arrival; she
looked at him with a sly expression, sighed, and shook her head.


“How is this, my friends?” she said. “Tut, tut, the lad’s in his
twenty-eighth year, and he is still leading a gay bachelor life; tut, tut,
tut....”


From the other room her soft, even speech sounded like tut, tut, tut. She
began whispering with her husband and Aksinya, and their faces wore the
same sly and mysterious expression as though they were conspirators.


It was decided to marry Anisim.


“Oh, tut, tut... the younger brother has been married long ago,” said
Varvara, “and you are still without a helpmate like a cock at a fair. What
is the meaning of it? Tut, tut, you will be married, please God, then as
you choose—you will go into the service and your wife will remain
here at home to help us. There is no order in your life, young man, and I
see you have forgotten how to live properly. Tut, tut, it’s the same
trouble with all you townspeople.”


When the Tsybukins married, the most handsome girls were chosen as brides
for them as rich men. For Anisim, too, they found a handsome one. He was
himself of an uninteresting and inconspicuous appearance; of a feeble,
sickly build and short stature; he had full, puffy cheeks which looked as
though he were blowing them out; his eyes looked with a keen, unbJlinking
stare; his beard was red and scanty, and when he was thinking he always
put it into his mouth and bit it; moreover he often drank too much, and
that was noticeable from his face and his walk. But when he was informed
that they had found a very beautiful bride for him, he said:


“Oh well, I am not a fright myself. All of us Tsybukins are handsome, I
may say.”


The village of Torguevo was near the town. Half of it had lately been
incorporated into the town, the other half remained a village. In the
first—the town half—there was a widow living in her own little
house; she had a sister living with her who was quite poor and went out to
work by the day, and this sister had a daughter called Lipa, a girl who
went out to work, too. People in Torguevo were already talking about
Lipa’s good looks, but her terrible poverty put everyone off; people
opined that some widower or elderly man would marry her regardless of her
poverty, or would perhaps take her to himself without marriage, and that
her mother would get enough to eat living with her. Varvara heard about
Lipa from the matchmakers, and she drove over to Torguevo.


Then a visit of inspection was arranged at the aunt’s, with lunch and wine
all in due order, and Lipa wore a new pink dress made on purpose for this
occasion, and a crimson ribbon like a flame gleamed in her hair. She was
pale-faced, thin, and frail, with soft, delicate features sunburnt from
working in the open air; a shy, mournful smile always hovered about her
face, and there was a childlike look in her eyes, trustful and curious.


She was young, quite a little girl, her bosom still scarcely perceptible,
but she could be married because she had reached the legal age. She really
was beautiful, and the only thing that might be thought unattractive was
her big masculine hands which hung idle now like two big claws.


“There is no dowry—and we don’t think much of that,” said Tsybukin
to the aunt. “We took a wife from a poor family for our son Stepan, too,
and now we can’t say too much for her. In house and in business alike she
has hands of gold.”


Lipa stood in the doorway and looked as though she would say: “Do with me
as you will, I trust you,” while her mother Praskovya the work-woman hid
herself in the kitchen numb with shyness. At one time in her youth a
merchant whose floors she was scrubbing stamped at her in a rage; she went
chill with terror and there always was a feeling of fear at the bottom of
her heart. When she was frightened her arms and legs trembled and her
cheeks twitched. Sitting in the kitchen she tried to hear what the
visitors were saying, and she kept crossing herself, pressing her fingers
to her forehead, and gazing at the ikons. Anisim, slightly drunk, opened
the door into the kitchen and said in a free-and-easy way:


“Why are you sitting in here, precious mamma? We are dull without you.”


And Praskovya, overcome with timidity, pressing her hands to her lean,
wasted bosom, said:


“Oh, not at all.... It’s very kind of you.”


After the visit of inspection the wedding day was fixed. Then Anisim
walked about the rooms at home whistling, or suddenly thinking of
something, would fall to brooding and would look at the floor fixedly,
silently, as though he would probe to the depths of the earth. He
expressed neither pleasure that he was to be married, married so soon, on
Low Sunday, nor a desire to see his bride, but simply went on whistling.
And it was evident he was only getting married because his father and
stepmother wished him to, and because it was the custom in the village to
marry the son in order to have a woman to help in the house. When he went
away he seemed in no haste, and behaved altogether not as he had done on
previous visits—was particularly free and easy, and talked
inappropriately.


III


In the village Shikalovo lived two dressmakers, sisters, belonging to the
Flagellant sect. The new clothes for the wedding were ordered from them,
and they often came to try them on, and stayed a long while drinking tea.
They were making Varvara a brown dress with black lace and bugles on it,
and Aksinya a light green dress with a yellow front, with a train. When
the dressmakers had finished their work Tsybukin paid them not in money
but in goods from the shop, and they went away depressed, carrying parcels
of tallow candles and tins of sardines which they did not in the least
need, and when they got out of the village into the open country they sat
down on a hillock and cried.


Anisim arrived three days before the wedding, rigged out in new clothes
from top to toe. He had dazzling india-rubber goloshes, and instead of a
cravat wore a red cord with little balls on it, and over his shoulder he
had hung an overcoat, also new, without putting his arms into the sleeves.


After crossing himself sedately before the ikon, he greeted his father and
gave him ten silver roubles and ten half-roubles; to Varvara he gave as
much, and to Aksinya twenty quarter-roubles. The chief charm of the
present lay in the fact that all the coins, as though carefully matched,
were new and glittered in the sun. Trying to seem grave and sedate he
pursed up his face and puffed out his cheeks, and he smelt of spirits.
Probably he had visited the refreshment bar at every station. And again
there was a free-and-easiness about the man—something superfluous
and out of place. Then Anisim had lunch and drank tea with the old man,
and Varvara turned the new coins over in her hand and inquired about
villagers who had gone to live in the town.


“They are all right, thank God, they get on quite well,” said Anisim.
“Only something has happened to Ivan Yegorov: his old wife Sofya
Nikiforovna is dead. From consumption. They ordered the memorial dinner
for the peace of her soul at the confectioner’s at two and a half roubles
a head. And there was real wine. Those who were peasants from our village—they
paid two and a half roubles for them, too. They ate nothing, as though a
peasant would understand sauce!”


“Two and a half,” said his father, shaking his head.


“Well, it’s not like the country there, you go into a restaurant to have a
snack of something, you ask for one thing and another, others join till
there is a party of us, one has a drink—and before you know where
you are it is daylight and you’ve three or four roubles each to pay. And
when one is with Samorodov he likes to have coffee with brandy in it after
everything, and brandy is sixty kopecks for a little glass.”


“And he is making it all up,” said the old man enthusiastically; “he is
making it all up, lying!”


“I am always with Samorodov now. It is Samorodov who writes my letters to
you. He writes splendidly. And if I were to tell you, mamma,” Anisim went
on gaily, addressing Varvara, “the sort of fellow that Samorodov is, you
would not believe me. We call him Muhtar, because he is black like an
Armenian. I can see through him, I know all his affairs like the five
fingers of my hand, and he feels that, and he always follows me about, we
are regular inseparables. He seems not to like it in a way, but he can’t
get on without me. Where I go he goes. I have a correct, trustworthy eye,
mamma. One sees a peasant selling a shirt in the market place. ‘Stay, that
shirt’s stolen.’ And really it turns out it is so: the shirt was a stolen
one.”


“What do you tell from?” asked Varvara.


“Not from anything, I have just an eye for it. I know nothing about the
shirt, only for some reason I seem drawn to it: it’s stolen, and that’s
all I can say. Among us detectives it’s come to their saying, ‘Oh, Anisim
has gone to shoot snipe!’ That means looking for stolen goods. Yes....
Anybody can steal, but it is another thing to keep! The earth is wide, but
there is nowhere to hide stolen goods.”


“In our village a ram and two ewes were carried off last week,” said
Varvara, and she heaved a sigh, and there is no one to try and find
them.... Oh, tut, tut..”


“Well, I might have a try. I don’t mind.”


The day of the wedding arrived. It was a cool but bright, cheerful April
day. People were driving about Ukleevo from early morning with pairs or
teams of three horses decked with many-coloured ribbons on their yokes and
manes, with a jingle of bells. The rooks, disturbed by this activity, were
cawing noisily in the willows, and the starlings sang their loudest
unceasingly as though rejoicing that there was a wedding at the
Tsybukins’.


Indoors the tables were already covered with long fish, smoked hams,
stuffed fowls, boxes of sprats, pickled savouries of various sorts, and a
number of bottles of vodka and wine; there was a smell of smoked sausage
and of sour tinned lobster. Old Tsybukin walked about near the tables,
tapping with his heels and sharpening the knives against each other. They
kept calling Varvara and asking for things, and she was constantly with a
distracted face running breathlessly into the kitchen, where the man cook
from Kostukov’s and the woman cook from Hrymin Juniors’ had been at work
since early morning. Aksinya, with her hair curled, in her stays without
her dress on, in new creaky boots, flew about the yard like a whirlwind
showing glimpses of her bare knees and bosom.


It was noisy, there was a sound of scolding and oaths; passers-by stopped
at the wide-open gates, and in everything there was a feeling that
something extraordinary was happening.


“They have gone for the bride!”


The bells began jingling and died away far beyond the village.... Between
two and three o’clock people ran up: again there was a jingling of bells:
they were bringing the bride! The church was full, the candelabra were
lighted, the choir were singing from music books as old Tsybukin had
wished it. The glare of the lights and the bright coloured dresses dazzled
Lipa; she felt as though the singers with their loud voices were hitting
her on the head with a hammer. Her boots and the stays, which she had put
on for the first time in her life, pinched her, and her face looked as
though she had only just come to herself after fainting; she gazed about
without understanding. Anisim, in his black coat with a red cord instead
of a tie, stared at the same spot lost in thought, and when the singers
shouted loudly he hurriedly crossed himself. He felt touched and disposed
to weep. This church was familiar to him from earliest childhood; at one
time his dead mother used to bring him here to take the sacrament; at one
time he used to sing in the choir; every ikon he remembered so well, every
corner. Here he was being married, he had to take a wife for the sake of
doing the proper thing, but he was not thinking of that now, he had
forgotten his wedding completely. Tears dimmed his eyes so that he could
not see the ikons, he felt heavy at heart; he prayed and besought God that
the misfortunes that threatened him, that were ready to burst upon him
to-morrow, if not to-day, might somehow pass him by as storm-clouds in
time of drought pass over the village without yielding one drop of rain.
And so many sins were heaped up in the past, so many sins, all getting
away from them or setting them right was so beyond hope that it seemed
incongruous even to ask forgiveness. But he did ask forgiveness, and even
gave a loud sob, but no one took any notice of that, since they all
supposed he had had a drop too much.


There was a sound of a fretful childish wail:


“Take me away, mamma darling!”


“Quiet there!” cried the priest.


When they returned from the church people ran after them; there were
crowds, too, round the shop, round the gates, and in the yard under the
windows. The peasant women came in to sing songs of congratulation to
them. The young couple had scarcely crossed the threshold when the
singers, who were already standing in the outer room with their music
books, broke into a loud chant at the top of their voices; a band ordered
expressly from the town began playing. Foaming Don wine was brought in
tall wine-glasses, and Elizarov, a carpenter who did jobs by contract, a
tall, gaunt old man with eyebrows so bushy that his eyes could scarcely be
seen, said, addressing the happy pair:


“Anisim and you, my child, love one another, live in God’s way, little
children, and the Heavenly Mother will not abandon you.”


He leaned his face on the old father’s shoulder and gave a sob.


“Grigory Petrovitch, let us weep, let us weep with joy!” he said in a thin
voice, and then at once burst out laughing in a loud bass guffaw.
“Ho-ho-ho! This is a fine daughter-in-law for you too! Everything is in
its place in her; all runs smoothly, no creaking, the mechanism works
well, lots of screws in it.”


He was a native of the Yegoryevsky district, but had worked in the
factories in Ukleevo and the neighborhood from his youth up, and had made
it his home. He had been a familiar figure for years as old and gaunt and
lanky as now, and for years he had been nicknamed “Crutch.” Perhaps
because he had been for forty years occupied in repairing the factory
machinery he judged everybody and everything by its soundness or its need
of repair. And before sitting down to the table he tried several chairs to
see whether they were solid, and he touched the smoked fish also.


After the Don wine, they all sat down to the table. The visitors talked,
moving their chairs. The singers were singing in the outer room. The band
was playing, and at the same time the peasant women in the yard were
singing their songs all in chorus—and there was an awful, wild
medley of sounds which made one giddy.


Crutch turned round in his chair and prodded his neighbours with his
elbows, prevented people from talking, and laughed and cried alternately.


“Little children, little children, little children,” he muttered rapidly.
“Aksinya my dear, Varvara darling, we will live all in peace and harmony,
my dear little axes....”


He drank little and was now only drunk from one glass of English bitters.
The revolting bitters, made from nobody knows what, intoxicated everyone
who drank it as though it had stunned them. Their tongues began to falter.


The local clergy, the clerks from the factories with their wives, the
tradesmen and tavern-keepers from the other villages were present. The
clerk and the elder of the rural district who had served together for
fourteen years, and who had during all that time never signed a single
document for anybody nor let a single person out of the local court
without deceiving or insulting him, were sitting now side by side, both
fat and well-fed, and it seemed as though they were so saturated in
injustice and falsehood that even the skin of their faces was somehow
peculiar, fraudulent. The clerk’s wife, a thin woman with a squint, had
brought all her children with her, and like a bird of prey looked aslant
at the plates and snatched anything she could get hold of to put in her
own or her children’s pockets.


Lipa sat as though turned to stone, still with the same expression as in
church. Anisim had not said a single word to her since he had made her
acquaintance, so that he did not yet know the sound of her voice; and now,
sitting beside her, he remained mute and went on drinking bitters, and
when he got drunk he began talking to the aunt who was sitting opposite:


“I have a friend called Samorodov. A peculiar man. He is by rank an
honorary citizen, and he can talk. But I know him through and through,
auntie, and he feels it. Pray join me in drinking to the health of
Samorodov, auntie!”


Varvara, worn out and distracted, walked round the table pressing the
guests to eat, and was evidently pleased that there were so many dishes
and that everything was so lavish—no one could disparage them now.
The sun set, but the dinner went on: the guests were beyond knowing what
they were eating or drinking, it was impossible to distinguish what was
said, and only from time to time when the band subsided some peasant woman
could be heard shouting:


“They have sucked the blood out of us, the Herods; a pest on them!”


In the evening they danced to the band. The Hrymin Juniors came, bringing
their wine, and one of them, when dancing a quadrille, held a bottle in
each hand and a wineglass in his mouth, and that made everyone laugh. In
the middle of the quadrille they suddenly crooked their knees and danced
in a squatting position; Aksinya in green flew by like a flash, stirring
up a wind with her train. Someone trod on her flounce and Crutch shouted:


“Aie, they have torn off the panel! Children!”


Aksinya had naive grey eyes which rarely bJlinked, and a naive smile played
continually on her face. And in those unbJlinking eyes, and in that little
head on the long neck, and in her slenderness there was something
snake-like; all in green but for the yellow on her bosom, she looked with
a smile on her face as a viper looks out of the young rye in the spring at
the passers-by, stretching itself and lifting its head. The Hrymins were
free in their behaviour to her, and it was very noticeable that she was on
intimate terms with the elder of them. But her deaf husband saw nothing,
he did not look at her; he sat with his legs crossed and ate nuts,
cracking them so loudly that it sounded like pistol shots.


But, behold, old Tsybukin himself walked into the middle of the room and
waved his handkerchief as a sign that he, too, wanted to dance the Russian
dance, and all over the house and from the crowd in the yard rose a roar
of approbation:


“He’s going to dance! He himself!”


Varvara danced, but the old man only waved his handkerchief and kicked up
his heels, but the people in the yard, propped against one another,
peeping in at the windows, were in raptures, and for the moment forgave
him everything—his wealth and the wrongs he had done them.


“Well done, Grigory Petrovitch!” was heard in the crowd. “That’s right, do
your best! You can still play your part! Ha-ha!”


It was kept up till late, till two o’clock in the morning. Anisim,
staggering, went to take leave of the singers and bandsmen, and gave each
of them a new half-rouble. His father, who was not staggering but still
seemed to be standing on one leg, saw his guests off, and said to each of
them:


“The wedding has cost two thousand.”


As the party was breaking up, someone took the Shikalovo innkeeper’s good
coat instead of his own old one, and Anisim suddenly flew into a rage and
began shouting:


“Stop, I’ll find it at once; I know who stole it, stop.”


He ran out into the street and pursued someone. He was caught, brought
back home and shoved, drunken, red with anger, and wet, into the room
where the aunt was undressing Lipa, and was locked in.


IV


Five days had passed. Anisim, who was preparing to go, went upstairs to
say good-bye to Varvara. All the lamps were burning before the ikons,
there was a smell of incense, while she sat at the window knitting a
stocking of red wool.


“You have not stayed with us long,” she said. “You’ve been dull, I dare
say. Oh, tut, tut. We live comfortably; we have plenty of everything. We
celebrated your wedding properly, in good style; your father says it came
to two thousand. In fact we live like merchants, only it’s dreary. We
treat the people very badly. My heart aches, my dear; how we treat them,
my goodness! Whether we exchange a horse or buy something or hire a
labourer—it’s cheating in everything. Cheating and cheating. The
Lenten oil in the shop is bitter, rancid, the people have pitch that is
better. But surely, tell me pray, couldn’t we sell good oil?”


“Every man to his job, mamma.”


“But you know we all have to die? Oy, oy, really you ought to talk to your
father...!”


“Why, you should talk to him yourself.”


“Well, well, I did put in my word, but he said just what you do: ‘Every
man to his own job.’ Do you suppose in the next world they’ll consider
what job you have been put to? God’s judgment is just.”


“Of course no one will consider,” said Anisim, and he heaved a sigh.
“There is no God, anyway, you know, mamma, so what considering can there
be?”


Varvara looked at him with surprise, burst out laughing, and clasped her
hands. Perhaps because she was so genuinely surprised at his words and
looked at him as though he were a queer person, he was confused.


“Perhaps there is a God, only there is no faith. When I was being married
I was not myself. Just as you may take an egg from under a hen and there
is a chicken chirping in it, so my conscience was beginning to chirp in
me, and while I was being married I thought all the time there was a God!
But when I left the church it was nothing. And indeed, how can I tell
whether there is a God or not? We are not taught right from childhood, and
while the babe is still at his mother’s breast he is only taught ‘every
man to his own job.’ Father does not believe in God, either. You were
saying that Guntorev had some sheep stolen.... I have found them; it was a
peasant at Shikalovo stole them; he stole them, but father’s got the
fleeces... so that’s all his faith amounts to.”


Anisim winked and wagged his head.


“The elder does not believe in God, either,” he went on. “And the clerk
and the deacon, too. And as for their going to church and keeping the
fasts, that is simply to prevent people talking ill of them, and in case
it really may be true that there will be a Day of Judgment. Nowadays
people say that the end of the world has come because people have grown
weaker, do not honour their parents, and so on. All that is nonsense. My
idea, mamma, is that all our trouble is because there is so little
conscience in people. I see through things, mamma, and I understand. If a
man has a stolen shirt I see it. A man sits in a tavern and you fancy he
is drinking tea and no more, but to me the tea is neither here nor there;
I see further, he has no conscience. You can go about the whole day and
not meet one man with a conscience. And the whole reason is that they
don’t know whether there is a God or not.... Well, good-bye, mamma, keep
alive and well, don’t remember evil against me.”


Anisim bowed down at Varvara’s feet.


“I thank you for everything, mamma,” he said. “You are a great gain to our
family. You are a very ladylike woman, and I am very pleased with you.”


Much moved, Anisim went out, but returned again and said:


“Samorodov has got me mixed up in something: I shall either make my
fortune or come to grief. If anything happens, then you must comfort my
father, mamma.”


“Oh, nonsense, don’t you worry, tut, tut, tut... God is merciful. And,
Anisim, you should be affectionate to your wife, instead of giving each
other sulky looks as you do; you might smile at least.”


“Yes, she is rather a queer one,” said Anisim, and he gave a sigh. “She
does not understand anything, she never speaks. She is very young, let her
grow up.”


A tall, sleek white stallion was already standing at the front door,
harnessed to the chaise.


Old Tsybukin jumped in jauntily with a run and took the reins. Anisim
kissed Varvara, Aksinya, and his brother. On the steps Lipa, too, was
standing; she was standing motionless, looking away, and it seemed as
though she had not come to see him off but just by chance for some unknown
reason. Anisim went up to her and just touched her cheek with his lips.


“Good-bye,” he said.


And without looking at him she gave a strange smile; her face began to
quiver, and everyone for some reason felt sorry for her. Anisim, too,
leaped into the chaise with a bound and put his arms jauntily akimbo, for
he considered himself a good-looking fellow.


When they drove up out of the ravine Anisim kept looking back towards the
village. It was a warm, bright day. The cattle were being driven out for
the first time, and the peasant girls and women were walking by the herd
in their holiday dresses. The dun-coloured bull bellowed, glad to be free,
and pawed the ground with his forefeet. On all sides, above and below, the
larks were singing. Anisim looked round at the elegant white church—it
had only lately been whitewashed—and he thought how he had been
praying in it five days before; he looked round at the school with its
green roof, at the little river in which he used once to bathe and catch
fish, and there was a stir of joy in his heart, and he wished that walls
might rise up from the ground and prevent him from going further, and that
he might be left with nothing but the past.


At the station they went to the refreshment room and drank a glass of
sherry each. His father felt in his pocket for his purse to pay.


“I will stand treat,” said Anisim. The old man, touched and delighted,
slapped him on the shoulder, and winked to the waiter as much as to say,
“See what a fine son I have got.”


“You ought to stay at home in the business, Anisim,” he said; “you would
be worth any price to me! I would shower gold on you from head to foot, my
son.”


“It can’t be done, papa.”


The sherry was sour and smelt of sealing-wax, but they had another glass.


When old Tsybukin returned home from the station, for the first moment he
did not recognize his younger daughter-in-law. As soon as her husband had
driven out of the yard, Lipa was transformed and suddenly brightened up.
Wearing a threadbare old petticoat, with her feet bare and her sleeves
tucked up to the shoulders, she was scrubbing the stairs in the entry and
singing in a silvery little voice, and when she brought out a big tub of
dirty water and looked up at the sun with her childlike smile it seemed as
though she, too, were a lark.


An old labourer who was passing by the door shook his head and cleared his
throat.


“Yes, indeed, your daughters-in-law, Grigory Petrovitch, are a blessing
from God,” he said. “Not women, but treasures!”


V


On Friday the 8th of July, Elizarov, nicknamed Crutch, and Lipa were
returning from the village of Kazanskoe, where they had been to a service
on the occasion of a church holiday in the honour of the Holy Mother of
Kazan. A good distance after them walked Lipa’s mother Praskovya, who
always fell behind, as she was ill and short of breath. It was drawing
towards evening.


“A-a-a...” said Crutch, wondering as he listened to Lipa. “A-a!... We-ell!


“I am very fond of jam, Ilya Makaritch,” said Lipa. “I sit down in my
little corner and drink tea and eat jam. Or I drink it with Varvara
Nikolaevna, and she tells some story full of feeling. We have a lot of jam—four
jars. ‘Have some, Lipa; eat as much as you like.’”


“A-a-a, four jars!”


“They live very well. We have white bread with our tea; and meat, too, as
much as one wants. They live very well, only I am frightened with them,
Ilya Makaritch. Oh, oh, how frightened I am!”


“Why are you frightened, child?” asked Crutch, and he looked back to see
how far Praskovya was behind.


“To begin with, when the wedding had been celebrated I was afraid of
Anisim Grigoritch. Anisim Grigoritch did nothing, he didn’t ill-treat me,
only when he comes near me a cold shiver runs all over me, through all my
bones. And I did not sleep one night, I trembled all over and kept praying
to God. And now I am afraid of Aksinya, Ilya Makaritch. It’s not that she
does anything, she is always laughing, but sometimes she glances at the
window, and her eyes are so fierce and there is a gleam of green in them—like
the eyes of the sheep in the shed. The Hrymin Juniors are leading her
astray: ‘Your old man,’ they tell her, ‘has a bit of land at Butyokino, a
hundred and twenty acres,’ they say, ‘and there is sand and water there,
so you, Aksinya,’ they say, ‘build a brickyard there and we will go shares
in it.’ Bricks now are twenty roubles the thousand, it’s a profitable
business. Yesterday at dinner Aksinya said to my father-in-law: ‘I want to
build a brickyard at Butyokino; I’m going into business on my own
account.’ She laughed as she said it. And Grigory Petrovitch’s face
darkened, one could see he did not like it. ‘As long as I live,’ he said,
‘the family must not break up, we must go on altogether.’ She gave a look
and gritted her teeth.... Fritters were served, she would not eat them.”


“A-a-a!...” Crutch was surprised.


“And tell me, if you please, when does she sleep?” said Lipa. “She sleeps
for half an hour, then jumps up and keeps walking and walking about to see
whether the peasants have not set fire to something, have not stolen
something.... I am frightened with her, Ilya Makaritch. And the Hrymin
Juniors did not go to bed after the wedding, but drove to the town to go
to law with each other; and folks do say it is all on account of Aksinya.
Two of the brothers have promised to build her a brickyard, but the third
is offended, and the factory has been at a standstill for a month, and my
uncle Prohor is without work and goes about from house to house getting
crusts. ‘Hadn’t you better go working on the land or sawing up wood,
meanwhile, uncle?’ I tell him; ‘why disgrace yourself?’ ‘I’ve got out of
the way of it,’ he says; ‘I don’t know how to do any sort of peasant’s
work now, Lipinka.’...”


They stopped to rest and wait for Praskovya near a copse of young
aspen-trees. Elizarov had long been a contractor in a small way, but he
kept no horses, going on foot all over the district with nothing but a
little bag in which there was bread and onions, and stalking along with
big strides, swinging his arms. And it was difficult to walk with him.


At the entrance to the copse stood a milestone. Elizarov touched it; read
it. Praskovya reached them out of breath. Her wrinkled and always
scared-looking face was beaming with happiness; she had been at church
to-day like anyone else, then she had been to the fair and there had drunk
pear cider. For her this was unusual, and it even seemed to her now that
she had lived for her own pleasure that day for the first time in her
life. After resting they all three walked on side by side. The sun had
already set, and its beams filtered through the copse, casting a light on
the trunks of the trees. There was a faint sound of voices ahead. The
Ukleevo girls had long before pushed on ahead but had lingered in the
copse, probably gathering mushrooms.


“Hey, wenches!” cried Elizarov. “Hey, my beauties!”


There was a sound of laughter in response.


“Crutch is coming! Crutch! The old horseradish.”


And the echo laughed, too. And then the copse was left behind. The tops of
the factory chimneys came into view. The cross on the belfry glittered:
this was the village: “the one at which the deacon ate all the caviare at
the funeral.” Now they were almost home; they only had to go down into the
big ravine. Lipa and Praskovya, who had been walking barefooted, sat down
on the grass to put on their boots; Elizar sat down with them. If they
looked down from above Ukleevo looked beautiful and peaceful with its
willow-trees, its white church, and its little river, and the only blot on
the picture was the roof of the factories, painted for the sake of
cheapness a gloomy ashen grey. On the slope on the further side they could
see the rye—some in stacks and sheaves here and there as though
strewn about by the storm, and some freshly cut lying in swathes; the
oats, too, were ripe and glistened now in the sun like mother-of-pearl. It
was harvest-time. To-day was a holiday, to-morrow they would harvest the
rye and carry the hay, and then Sunday a holiday again; every day there
were mutterings of distant thunder. It was misty and looked like rain,
and, gazing now at the fields, everyone thought, God grant we get the
harvest in in time; and everyone felt gay and joyful and anxious at heart.


“Mowers ask a high price nowadays,” said Praskovya. “One rouble and forty
kopecks a day.”


People kept coming and coming from the fair at Kazanskoe: peasant women,
factory workers in new caps, beggars, children.... Here a cart would drive
by stirring up the dust and behind it would run an unsold horse, and it
seemed glad it had not been sold; then a cow was led along by the horns,
resisting stubbornly; then a cart again, and in it drunken peasants
swinging their legs. An old woman led a little boy in a big cap and big
boots; the boy was tired out with the heat and the heavy boots which
prevented his bending his legs at the knees, but yet blew unceasingly with
all his might at a tin trumpet. They had gone down the slope and turned
into the street, but the trumpet could still be heard.


“Our factory owners don’t seem quite themselves...” said Elizarov.
“There’s trouble. Kostukov is angry with me. ‘Too many boards have gone on
the cornices.’ ‘Too many? As many have gone on it as were needed, Vassily
Danilitch; I don’t eat them with my porridge.’ ‘How can you speak to me
like that?’ said he, ‘you good-for-nothing blockhead! Don’t forget
yourself! It was I made you a contractor.’ ‘That’s nothing so wonderful,’
said I. ‘Even before I was a contractor I used to have tea every day.’
‘You are a rascal...’ he said. I said nothing. ‘We are rascals in this
world,’ thought I, ‘and you will be rascals in the next....’ Ha-ha-ha! The
next day he was softer. ‘Don’t you bear malice against me for my words,
Makaritch,’ he said. ‘If I said too much,’ says he, ‘what of it? I am a
merchant of the first guild, your superior—you ought to hold your
tongue.’ ‘You,’ said I, ‘are a merchant of the first guild and I am a
carpenter, that’s correct. And Saint Joseph was a carpenter, too. Ours is
a righteous calling and pleasing to God, and if you are pleased to be my
superior you are very welcome to it, Vassily Danilitch.’ And later on,
after that conversation I mean, I thought: ‘Which was the superior? A
merchant of the first guild or a carpenter?’ The carpenter must be, my
child!”


Crutch thought a minute and added:


“Yes, that’s how it is, child. He who works, he who is patient is the
superior.”


By now the sun had set and a thick mist as white as milk was rising over
the river, in the church enclosure, and in the open spaces round the
factories. Now when the darkness was coming on rapidly, when lights were
twinkling below, and when it seemed as though the mists were hiding a
fathomless abyss, Lipa and her mother who were born in poverty and
prepared to live so till the end, giving up to others everything except
their frightened, gentle souls, may have fancied for a minute perhaps that
in the vast, mysterious world, among the endless series of lives, they,
too, counted for something, and they, too, were superior to someone; they
liked sitting here at the top, they smiled happily and forgot that they
must go down below again all the same.


At last they went home again. The mowers were sitting on the ground at the
gates near the shop. As a rule the Ukleevo peasants did not go to
Tsybukin’s to work, and they had to hire strangers, and now in the
darkness it seemed as though there were men sitting there with long black
beards. The shop was open, and through the doorway they could see the deaf
man playing draughts with a boy. The mowers were singing softly, scarcely
audibly, or loudly demanding their wages for the previous day, but they
were not paid for fear they should go away before to-morrow. Old Tsybukin,
with his coat off, was sitting in his waistcoat with Aksinya under the
birch-tree, drinking tea; a lamp was burning on the table.


“I say, grandfather,” a mower called from outside the gates, as though
taunting him, “pay us half anyway! Hey, grandfather.”


And at once there was the sound of laughter, and then again they sang
hardly audibly.... Crutch, too, sat down to have some tea.


“We have been at the fair, you know,” he began telling them. “We have had
a walk, a very nice walk, my children, praise the Lord. But an unfortunate
thing happened: Sashka the blacksmith bought some tobacco and gave the
shopman half a rouble to be sure. And the half rouble was a false one”—Crutch
went on, and he meant to speak in a whisper, but he spoke in a smothered
husky voice which was audible to everyone. “The half-rouble turned out to
be a bad one. He was asked where he got it. ‘Anisim Tsybukin gave it me,’
he said. ‘When I went to his wedding,’ he said. They called the police
inspector, took the man away.... Look out, Grigory Petrovitch, that
nothing comes of it, no talk....”


“Gra-ndfather!” the same voice called tauntingly outside the gates.
“Gra-andfather!”


A silence followed.


“Ah, little children, little children, little children...” Crutch muttered
rapidly, and he got up. He was overcome with drowsiness. “Well, thank you
for the tea, for the sugar, little children. It is time to sleep. I am
like a bit of rotten timber nowadays, my beams are crumbling under me.
Ho-ho-ho! I suppose it’s time I was dead.”


And he gave a gulp. Old Tsybukin did not finish his tea but sat on a
little, pondering; and his face looked as though he were listening to the
footsteps of Crutch, who was far away down the street.


“Sashka the blacksmith told a lie, I expect,” said Aksinya, guessing his
thoughts.


He went into the house and came back a little later with a parcel; he
opened it, and there was the gleam of roubles—perfectly new coins.
He took one, tried it with his teeth, flung it on the tray; then flung
down another.


“The roubles really are false...” he said, looking at Aksinya and seeming
perplexed. “These are those Anisim brought, his present. Take them,
daughter,” he whispered, and thrust the parcel into her hands. “Take them
and throw them into the well... confound them! And mind there is no talk
about it. Harm might come of it.... Take away the samovar, put out the
light.”


Lipa and her mother sitting in the barn saw the lights go out one after
the other; only overhead in Varvara’s room there were blue and red lamps
gleaming, and a feeling of peace, content, and happy ignorance seemed to
float down from there. Praskovya could never get used to her daughter’s
being married to a rich man, and when she came she huddled timidly in the
outer room with a deprecating smile on her face, and tea and sugar were
sent out to her. And Lipa, too, could not get used to it either, and after
her husband had gone away she did not sleep in her bed, but lay down
anywhere to sleep, in the kitchen or the barn, and every day she scrubbed
the floor or washed the clothes, and felt as though she were hired by the
day. And now, on coming back from the service, they drank tea in the
kitchen with the cook, then they went into the barn and lay down on the
ground between the sledge and the wall. It was dark here and smelt of
harness. The lights went out about the house, then they could hear the
deaf man shutting up the shop, the mowers settling themselves about the
yard to sleep. In the distance at the Hrymin Juniors’ they were playing on
the expensive concertina.... Praskovya and Lipa began to go to sleep.


And when they were awakened by somebody’s steps it was bright moonlight;
at the entrance of the barn stood Aksinya with her bedding in her arms.


“Maybe it’s a bit cooler here,” she said; then she came in and lay down
almost in the doorway so that the moonlight fell full upon her.


She did not sleep, but breathed heavily, tossing from side to side with
the heat, throwing off almost all the bedclothes. And in the magic
moonlight what a beautiful, what a proud animal she was! A little time
passed, and then steps were heard again: the old father, white all over,
appeared in the doorway.


“Aksinya,” he called, “are you here?”


“Well?” she responded angrily.


“I told you just now to throw the money into the well, have you done so?”


“What next, throwing property into the water! I gave them to the
mowers....”


“Oh my God!” cried the old man, dumbfounded and alarmed. “Oh my God! you
wicked woman....”


He flung up his hands and went out, and he kept saying something as he
went away. And a little later Aksinya sat up and sighed heavily with
annoyance, then got up and, gathering up her bedclothes in her arms, went
out.


“Why did you marry me into this family, mother?” said Lipa.


“One has to be married, daughter. It was not us who ordained it.”


And a feeling of inconsolable woe was ready to take possession of them.
But it seemed to them that someone was looking down from the height of the
heavens, out of the blue from where the stars were seeing everything that
was going on in Ukleevo, watching over them. And however great was
wickedness, still the night was calm and beautiful, and still in God’s
world there is and will be truth and justice as calm and beautiful, and
everything on earth is only waiting to be made one with truth and justice,
even as the moonlight is blended with the night.


And both, huddling close to one another, fell asleep comforted.


VI


News had come long before that Anisim had been put in prison for coining
and passing bad money. Months passed, more than half a year passed, the
long winter was over, spring had begun, and everyone in the house and the
village had grown used to the fact that Anisim was in prison. And when
anyone passed by the house or the shop at night he would remember that
Anisim was in prison; and when they rang at the churchyard for some
reason, that, too, reminded them that he was in prison awaiting trial.


It seemed as though a shadow had fallen upon the house. The house looked
darker, the roof was rustier, the heavy, iron-bound door into the shop,
which was painted green, was covered with cracks, or, as the deaf man
expressed it, “blisters”; and old Tsybukin seemed to have grown dingy,
too. He had given up cutting his hair and beard, and looked shaggy. He no
longer sprang jauntily into his chaise, nor shouted to beggars: “God will
provide!” His strength was on the wane, and that was evident in
everything. People were less afraid of him now, and the police officer
drew up a formal charge against him in the shop though he received his
regular bribe as before; and three times the old man was called up to the
town to be tried for illicit dealing in spirits, and the case was
continually adjourned owing to the non-appearance of witnesses, and old
Tsybukin was worn out with worry.


He often went to see his son, hired somebody, handed in a petition to
somebody else, presented a holy banner to some church. He presented the
governor of the prison in which Anisim was confined with a silver glass
stand with a long spoon and the inscription: “The soul knows its right
measure.”


“There is no one to look after things for us,” said Varvara. “Tut, tut....
You ought to ask someone of the gentlefolks, they would write to the head
officials.... At least they might let him out on bail! Why wear the poor
fellow out?”


She, too, was grieved, but had grown stouter and whiter; she lighted the
lamps before the ikons as before, and saw that everything in the house was
clean, and regaled the guests with jam and apple cheese. The deaf man and
Aksinya looked after the shop. A new project was in progress—a
brickyard in Butyokino—and Aksinya went there almost every day in
the chaise. She drove herself, and when she met acquaintances she
stretched out her neck like a snake out of the young rye, and smiled
naively and enigmatically. Lipa spent her time playing with the baby which
had been born to her before Lent. It was a tiny, thin, pitiful little
baby, and it was strange that it should cry and gaze about and be
considered a human being, and even be called Nikifor. He lay in his
swinging cradle, and Lipa would walk away towards the door and say, bowing
to him:


“Good-day, Nikifor Anisimitch!”


And she would rush at him and kiss him. Then she would walk away to the
door, bow again, and say:


‘Good-day, Nikifor Anisimitch!


And he kicked up his little red legs, and his crying was mixed with
laughter like the carpenter Elizarov’s.


At last the day of the trial was fixed. Tsybukin went away five days
before. Then they heard that the peasants called as witnesses had been
fetched; their old workman who had received a notice to appear went too.


The trial was on a Thursday. But Sunday had passed, and Tsybukin was still
not back, and there was no news. Towards the evening on Tuesday Varvara
was sitting at the open window, listening for her husband to come. In the
next room Lipa was playing with her baby. She was tossing him up in her
arms and saying enthusiastically:


“You will grow up ever so big, ever so big. You will be a peasant, we
shall go out to work together! We shall go out to work together!”


“Come, come,” said Varvara, offended. “Go out to work, what an idea, you
silly girl! He will be a merchant...!”


Lipa sang softly, but a minute later she forgot and again:


“You will grow ever so big, ever so big. You will be a peasant, we’ll go
out to work together.”


“There she is at it again!”


Lipa, with Nikifor in her arms, stood still in the doorway and asked:


“Why do I love him so much, mamma? Why do I feel so sorry for him?” she
went on in a quivering voice, and her eyes glistened with tears. “Who is
he? What is he like? As light as a little feather, as a little crumb, but
I love him; I love him like a real person. Here he can do nothing, he
can’t talk, and yet I know what he wants with his little eyes.”


Varvara was listening; the sound of the evening train coming in to the
station reached her. Had her husband come? She did not hear and she did
not heed what Lipa was saying, she had no idea how the time passed, but
only trembled all over—not from dread, but intense curiosity. She
saw a cart full of peasants roll quickly by with a rattle. It was the
witnesses coming back from the station. When the cart passed the shop the
old workman jumped out and walked into the yard. She could hear him being
greeted in the yard and being asked some questions....


“Deprivation of rights and all his property,” he said loudly, “and six
years’ penal servitude in Siberia.”


She could see Aksinya come out of the shop by the back way; she had just
been selling kerosene, and in one hand held a bottle and in the other a
can, and in her mouth she had some silver coins.


“Where is father?” she asked, lisping.


“At the station,” answered the labourer. “‘When it gets a little darker,’
he said, ‘then I shall come.’”


And when it became known all through the household that Anisim was
sentenced to penal servitude, the cook in the kitchen suddenly broke into
a wail as though at a funeral, imagining that this was demanded by the
proprieties:


“There is no one to care for us now you have gone, Anisim Grigoritch, our
bright falcon....”


The dogs began barking in alarm. Varvara ran to the window, and rushing
about in distress, shouted to the cook with all her might, straining her
voice:


“Sto-op, Stepanida, sto-op! Don’t harrow us, for Christ’s sake!”


They forgot to set the samovar, they could think of nothing. Only Lipa
could not make out what it was all about and went on playing with her
baby.


When the old father arrived from the station they asked him no questions.
He greeted them and walked through all the rooms in silence; he had no
supper.


“There was no one to see about things...” Varvara began when they were
alone. “I said you should have asked some of the gentry, you would not
heed me at the time.... A petition would...”


“I saw to things,” said her husband with a wave of his hand. “When Anisim
was condemned I went to the gentleman who was defending him. ‘It’s no use
now,’ he said, ‘it’s too late’; and Anisim said the same; it’s too late.
But all the same as I came out of the court I made an agreement with a
lawyer, I paid him something in advance. I’ll wait a week and then I will
go again. It is as God wills.”


Again the old man walked through all the rooms, and when he went back to
Varvara he said:


“I must be ill. My head’s in a sort of... fog. My thoughts are in a maze.”


He closed the door that Lipa might not hear, and went on softly:


“I am unhappy about my money. Do you remember on Low Sunday before his
wedding Anisim’s bringing me some new roubles and half-roubles? One parcel
I put away at the time, but the others I mixed with my own money. When my
uncle Dmitri Filatitch—the kingdom of heaven be his—was alive,
he used constantly to go journeys to Moscow and to the Crimea to buy
goods. He had a wife, and this same wife, when he was away buying goods,
used to take up with other men. She had half a dozen children. And when
uncle was in his cups he would laugh and say: ‘I never can make out,’ he
used to say, ‘which are my children and which are other people’s.’ An
easy-going disposition, to be sure; and so I now can’t distinguish which
are genuine roubles and which are false ones. And it seems to me that they
are all false.”


“Nonsense, God bless you.”


“I take a ticket at the station, I give the man three roubles, and I keep
fancying they are false. And I am frightened. I must be ill.”


“There’s no denying it, we are all in God’s hands.... Oh dear, dear...”
said Varvara, and she shook her head. “You ought to think about this,
Grigory Petrovitch: you never know, anything may happen, you are not a
young man. See they don’t wrong your grandchild when you are dead and
gone. Oy, I am afraid they will be unfair to Nikifor! He has as good as no
father, his mother’s young and foolish... you ought to secure something
for him, poor little boy, at least the land, Butyokino, Grigory
Petrovitch, really! Think it over!” Varvara went on persuading him. “The
pretty boy, one is sorry for him! You go to-morrow and make out a deed;
why put it off?”


“I’d forgotten about my grandson,” said Tsybukin. “I must go and have a
look at him. So you say the boy is all right? Well, let him grow up,
please God.”


He opened the door and, crooking his finger, beckoned to Lipa. She went up
to him with the baby in her arms.


“If there is anything you want, Lipinka, you ask for it,” he said. “And
eat anything you like, we don’t grudge it, so long as it does you
good....” He made the sign of the cross over the baby. “And take care of
my grandchild. My son is gone, but my grandson is left.”


Tears rolled down his cheeks; he gave a sob and went away. Soon afterwards
he went to bed and slept soundly after seven sleepless nights.


VII


Old Tsybukin went to the town for a short time. Someone told Aksinya that
he had gone to the notary to make his will and that he was leaving
Butyokino, the very place where she had set up a brickyard, to Nikifor,
his grandson. She was informed of this in the morning when old Tsybukin
and Varvara were sitting near the steps under the birch-tree, drinking
their tea. She closed the shop in the front and at the back, gathered
together all the keys she had, and flung them at her father-in-law’s feet.


“I am not going on working for you,” she began in a loud voice, and
suddenly broke into sobs. “It seems I am not your daughter-in-law, but a
servant! Everybody’s jeering and saying, ‘See what a servant the Tsybukins
have got hold of!’ I did not come to you for wages! I am not a beggar, I
am not a slave, I have a father and mother.”


She did not wipe away her tears, she fixed upon her father-in-law eyes
full of tears, vindictive, squinting with wrath; her face and neck were
red and tense, and she was shouting at the top of her voice.


“I don’t mean to go on being a slave!” she went on. “I am worn out. When
it is work, when it is sitting in the shop day in and day out, scurrying
out at night for vodka—then it is my share, but when it is giving
away the land then it is for that convict’s wife and her imp. She is
mistress here, and I am her servant. Give her everything, the convict’s
wife, and may it choke her! I am going home! Find yourselves some other
fool, you damned Herods!”


Tsybukin had never in his life scolded or punished his children, and had
never dreamed that one of his family could speak to him rudely or behave
disrespectfully; and now he was very much frightened; he ran into the
house and there hid behind the cupboard. And Varvara was so much flustered
that she could not get up from her seat, and only waved her hands before
her as though she were warding off a bee.


“Oh, Holy Saints! what’s the meaning of it?” she muttered in horror. “What
is she shouting? Oh, dear, dear!... People will hear! Hush. Oh, hush!”


“He has given Butyokino to the convict’s wife,” Aksinya went on bawling.
“Give her everything now, I don’t want anything from you! Let me alone!
You are all a gang of thieves here! I have seen my fill of it, I have had
enough! You have robbed folks coming in and going out; you have robbed old
and young alike, you brigands! And who has been selling vodka without a
licence? And false money? You’ve filled boxes full of false coins, and now
I am no more use!”


A crowd had by now collected at the open gate and was staring into the
yard.


“Let the people look,” bawled Aksinya. “I will shame you all! You shall
burn with shame! You shall grovel at my feet. Hey! Stepan,” she called to
the deaf man, “let us go home this minute! Let us go to my father and
mother; I don’t want to live with convicts. Get ready!”


Clothes were hanging on lines stretched across the yard; she snatched off
her petticoats and blouses still wet and flung them into the deaf man’s
arms. Then in her fury she dashed about the yard by the linen, tore down
all of it, and what was not hers she threw on the ground and trampled
upon.


“Holy Saints, take her away,” moaned Varvara. “What a woman! Give her
Butyokino! Give it her, for the Lord’s sake!


“Well! Wha-at a woman!” people were saying at the gate. “She’s a wo-oman!
She’s going it—something like!”


Aksinya ran into the kitchen where washing was going on. Lipa was washing
alone, the cook had gone to the river to rinse the clothes. Steam was
rising from the trough and from the caldron on the side of the stove, and
the kitchen was thick and stifling from the steam. On the floor was a heap
of unwashed clothes, and Nikifor, kicking up his little red legs, had been
put down on a bench near them, so that if he fell he should not hurt
himself. Just as Aksinya went in Lipa took the former’s chemise out of the
heap and put it in the trough, and was just stretching out her hand to a
big ladle of boiling water which was standing on the table.


“Give it here,” said Aksinya, looking at her with hatred, and snatching
the chemise out of the trough; “it is not your business to touch my linen!
You are a convict’s wife, and ought to know your place and who you are.”


Lipa gazed at her, taken aback, and did not understand, but suddenly she
caught the look Aksinya turned upon the child, and at once she understood
and went numb all over.


“You’ve taken my land, so here you are!” Saying this Aksinya snatched up
the ladle with the boiling water and flung it over Nikifor.


After this there was heard a scream such as had never been heard before in
Ukleevo, and no one would have believed that a little weak creature like
Lipa could scream like that. And it was suddenly silent in the yard.


Aksinya walked into the house with her old naive smile.... The deaf man
kept moving about the yard with his arms full of linen, then he began
hanging it up again, in silence, without haste. And until the cook came
back from the river no one ventured to go into the kitchen and see what
was there.


VIII


Nikifor was taken to the district hospital, and towards evening he died
there. Lipa did not wait for them to come for her, but wrapped the dead
baby in its little quilt and carried it home.


The hospital, a new one recently built, with big windows, stood high up on
a hill; it was glittering from the setting sun and looked as though it
were on fire from inside. There was a little village below. Lipa went down
along the road, and before reaching the village sat down by a pond. A
woman brought a horse down to drink and the horse did not drink.


“What more do you want?” said the woman to it softly. “What do you want?”


A boy in a red shirt, sitting at the water’s edge, was washing his
father’s boots. And not another soul was in sight either in the village or
on the hill.


“It’s not drinking,” said Lipa, looking at the horse.


Then the woman with the horse and the boy with the boots walked away, and
there was no one left at all. The sun went to bed wrapped in cloth of gold
and purple, and long clouds, red and lilac, stretched across the sky,
guarded its slumbers. Somewhere far away a bittern cried, a hollow,
melancholy sound like a cow shut up in a barn. The cry of that mysterious
bird was heard every spring, but no one knew what it was like or where it
lived. At the top of the hill by the hospital, in the bushes close to the
pond, and in the fields the nightingales were trilling. The cuckoo kept
reckoning someone’s years and losing count and beginning again. In the
pond the frogs called angrily to one another, straining themselves to
bursting, and one could even make out the words: “That’s what you are!
That’s what you are!” What a noise there was! It seemed as though all
these creatures were singing and shouting so that no one might sleep on
that spring night, so that all, even the angry frogs, might appreciate and
enjoy every minute: life is given only once.


A silver half-moon was shining in the sky; there were many stars. Lipa had
no idea how long she sat by the pond, but when she got up and walked on
everybody was asleep in the little village, and there was not a single
light. It was probably about nine miles’ walk home, but she had not the
strength, she had not the power to think how to go: the moon gleamed now
in front, now on the right, and the same cuckoo kept calling in a voice
grown husky, with a chuckle as though gibing at her: “Oy, look out, you’ll
lose your way!” Lipa walked rapidly; she lost the kerchief from her
head... she looked at the sky and wondered where her baby’s soul was now:
was it following her, or floating aloft yonder among the stars and
thinking nothing now of his mother? Oh, how lonely it was in the open
country at night, in the midst of that singing when one cannot sing
oneself; in the midst of the incessant cries of joy when one cannot
oneself be joyful, when the moon, which cares not whether it is spring or
winter, whether men are alive or dead, looks down as lonely, too.... When
there is grief in the heart it is hard to be without people. If only her
mother, Praskovya, had been with her, or Crutch, or the cook, or some
peasant!


“Boo-oo!” cried the bittern. “Boo-oo!”


And suddenly she heard clearly the sound of human speech: “Put the horses
in, Vavila!”


By the wayside a camp fire was burning ahead of her: the flames had died
down, there were only red embers. She could hear the horses munching. In
the darkness she could see the outlines of two carts, one with a barrel,
the other, a lower one with sacks in it, and the figures of two men; one
was leading a horse to put it into the shafts, the other was standing
motionless by the fire with his hands behind his back. A dog growled by
the carts. The one who was leading the horse stopped and said:


“It seems as though someone were coming along the road.”


“Sharik, be quiet!” the other called to the dog.


And from the voice one could tell that the second was an old man. Lipa
stopped and said:


“God help you.”


The old man went up to her and answered not immediately:


“Good-evening!”


“Your dog does not bite, grandfather?”


“No, come along, he won’t touch you.”


“I have been at the hospital,” said Lipa after a pause. “My little son
died there. Here I am carrying him home.”


It must have been unpleasant for the old man to hear this, for he moved
away and said hurriedly:


“Never mind, my dear. It’s God’s will. You are very slow, lad,” he added,
addressing his companion; “look alive!”


“Your yoke’s nowhere,” said the young man; “it is not to be seen.”


“You are a regular Vavila.”


The old man picked up an ember, blew on it—only his eyes and nose
were lighted up—then, when they had found the yoke, he went with the
light to Lipa and looked at her, and his look expressed compassion and
tenderness.


“You are a mother,” he said; “every mother grieves for her child.”


And he sighed and shook his head as he said it. Vavila threw something on
the fire, stamped on it—and at once it was very dark; the vision
vanished, and as before there were only the fields, the sky with the
stars, and the noise of the birds hindering each other from sleep. And the
landrail called, it seemed, in the very place where the fire had been.


But a minute passed, and again she could see the two carts and the old man
and lanky Vavila. The carts creaked as they went out on the road.


“Are you holy men?” Lipa asked the old man.


“No. We are from Firsanovo.”


“You looked at me just now and my heart was softened. And the young man is
so gentle. I thought you must be holy men.”


“Are you going far?”


“To Ukleevo.”


“Get in, we will give you a lift as far as Kuzmenki, then you go straight
on and we turn off to the left.”


Vavila got into the cart with the barrel and the old man and Lipa got into
the other. They moved at a walking pace, Vavila in front.


“My baby was in torment all day,” said Lipa. “He looked at me with his
little eyes and said nothing; he wanted to speak and could not. Holy
Father, Queen of Heaven! In my grief I kept falling down on the floor. I
stood up and fell down by the bedside. And tell me, grandfather, why a
little thing should be tormented before his death? When a grown-up person,
a man or woman, are in torment their sins are forgiven, but why a little
thing, when he has no sins? Why?”


“Who can tell?” answered the old man.


They drove on for half an hour in silence.


“We can’t know everything, how and wherefore,” said the old man. “It is
ordained for the bird to have not four wings but two because it is able to
fly with two; and so it is ordained for man not to know everything but
only a half or a quarter. As much as he needs to know so as to live, so
much he knows.”


“It is better for me to go on foot, grandfather. Now my heart is all of a
tremble.”


“Never mind, sit still.”


The old man yawned and made the sign of the cross over his mouth.


“Never mind,” he repeated. “Yours is not the worst of sorrows. Life is
long, there will be good and bad to come, there will be everything. Great
is mother Russia,” he said, and looked round on each side of him. “I have
been all over Russia, and I have seen everything in her, and you may
believe my words, my dear. There will be good and there will be bad. I
went as a delegate from my village to Siberia, and I have been to the Amur
River and the Altai Mountains and I settled in Siberia; I worked the land
there, then I was homesick for mother Russia and I came back to my native
village. We came back to Russia on foot; and I remember we went on a
steamer, and I was thin as thin, all in rags, barefoot, freezing with
cold, and gnawing a crust, and a gentleman who was on the steamer—the
kingdom of heaven be his if he is dead—looked at me pitifully, and
the tears came into his eyes. ‘Ah,’ he said, ‘your bread is black, your
days are black....’ And when I got home, as the saying is, there was
neither stick nor stall; I had a wife, but I left her behind in Siberia,
she was buried there. So I am living as a day labourer. And yet I tell
you: since then I have had good as well as bad. Here I do not want to die,
my dear, I would be glad to live another twenty years; so there has been
more of the good. And great is our mother Russia!” and again he gazed to
each side and looked round.


“Grandfather,” Lipa asked, “when anyone dies, how many days does his soul
walk the earth?”


“Who can tell! Ask Vavila here, he has been to school. Now they teach them
everything. Vavila!” the old man called to him.


“Yes!”


“Vavila, when anyone dies how long does his soul walk the earth?”


Vavila stopped the horse and only then answered:


“Nine days. My uncle Kirilla died and his soul lived in our hut thirteen
days after.”


“How do you know?”


“For thirteen days there was a knocking in the stove.”


“Well, that’s all right. Go on,” said the old man, and it could be seen
that he did not believe a word of all that.


Near Kuzmenki the cart turned into the high road while Lipa went straight
on. It was by now getting light. As she went down into the ravine the
Ukleevo huts and the church were hidden in fog. It was cold, and it seemed
to her that the same cuckoo was calling still.


When Lipa reached home the cattle had not yet been driven out; everyone
was asleep. She sat down on the steps and waited. The old man was the
first to come out; he understood all that had happened from the first
glance at her, and for a long time he could not articulate a word, but
only moved his lips without a sound.


“Ech, Lipa,” he said, “you did not take care of my grandchild....”


Varvara was awakened. She clasped her hands and broke into sobs, and
immediately began laying out the baby.


“And he was a pretty child...” she said. “Oh, dear, dear.... You only had
the one child, and you did not take care enough of him, you silly
girl....”


There was a requiem service in the morning and the evening. The funeral
took place the next day, and after it the guests and the priests ate a
great deal, and with such greed that one might have thought that they had
not tasted food for a long time. Lipa waited at table, and the priest,
lifting his fork on which there was a salted mushroom, said to her:


“Don’t grieve for the babe. For of such is the kingdom of heaven.”


And only when they had all separated Lipa realized fully that there was no
Nikifor and never would be, she realized it and broke into sobs. And she
did not know what room to go into to sob, for she felt that now that her
child was dead there was no place for her in the house, that she had no
reason to be here, that she was in the way; and the others felt it, too.


“Now what are you bellowing for?” Aksinya shouted, suddenly appearing in
the doorway; in honour of the funeral she was dressed all in new clothes
and had powdered her face. “Shut up!”


Lipa tried to stop but could not, and sobbed louder than ever.


“Do you hear?” shouted Aksinya, and she stamped her foot in violent anger.
“Who is it I am speaking to? Go out of the yard and don’t set foot here
again, you convict’s wife. Get away.”


“There, there, there,” the old man put in fussily. “Aksinya, don’t make
such an outcry, my girl.... She is crying, it is only natural... her child
is dead....”


“‘It’s only natural,’” Aksinya mimicked him. “Let her stay the night here,
and don’t let me see a trace of her here to-morrow! ‘It’s only
natural!’...” she mimicked him again, and, laughing, she went into the
shop.


Early the next morning Lipa went off to her mother at Torguevo.


IX


At the present time the steps and the front door of the shop have been
repainted and are as bright as though they were new, there are gay
geraniums in the windows as of old, and what happened in Tsybukin’s house
and yard three years ago is almost forgotten.


Grigory Petrovitch is looked upon as the master as he was in old days, but
in reality everything has passed into Aksinya’s hands; she buys and sells,
and nothing can be done without her consent. The brickyard is working
well; and as bricks are wanted for the railway the price has gone up to
twenty-four roubles a thousand; peasant women and girls cart the bricks to
the station and load them up in the trucks and earn a quarter-rouble a day
for the work.


Aksinya has gone into partnership with the Hrymin Juniors, and their
factory is now called Hrymin Juniors and Co. They have opened a tavern
near the station, and now the expensive concertina is played not at the
factory but at the tavern, and the head of the post office often goes
there, and he, too, is engaged in some sort of traffic, and the
stationmaster, too. Hrymin Juniors have presented the deaf man Stepan with
a gold watch, and he is constantly taking it out of his pocket and putting
it to his ear.


People say of Aksinya that she has become a person of power; and it is
true that when she drives in the morning to her brickyard, handsome and
happy, with the naive smile on her face, and afterwards when she is giving
orders there, one is aware of great power in her. Everyone is afraid of
her in the house and in the village and in the brickyard. When she goes to
the post the head of the postal department jumps up and says to her:


“I humbly beg you to be seated, Aksinya Abramovna!”


A certain landowner, middle-aged but foppish, in a tunic of fine cloth and
patent leather high boots, sold her a horse, and was so carried away by
talking to her that he knocked down the price to meet her wishes. He held
her hand a long time and, looking into her merry, sly, naive eyes, said:


“For a woman like you, Aksinya Abramovna, I should be ready to do anything
you please. Only say when we can meet where no one will interfere with
us?”


“Why, when you please.”


And since then the elderly fop drives up to the shop almost every day to
drink beer. And the beer is horrid, bitter as wormwood. The landowner
shakes his head, but he drinks it.


Old Tsybukin does not have anything to do with the business now at all. He
does not keep any money because he cannot distinguish between the good and
the false, but he is silent, he says nothing of this weakness. He has
become forgetful, and if they don’t give him food he does not ask for it.
They have grown used to having dinner without him, and Varvara often says:


“He went to bed again yesterday without any supper.”


And she says it unconcernedly because she is used to it. For some reason,
summer and winter alike, he wears a fur coat, and only in very hot weather
he does not go out but sits at home. As a rule putting on his fur coat,
wrapping it round him and turning up his collar, he walks about the
village, along the road to the station, or sits from morning till night on
the seat near the church gates. He sits there without stirring. Passers-by
bow to him, but he does not respond, for as of old he dislikes the
peasants. If he is asked a question he answers quite rationally and
politely, but briefly.


There is a rumour going about in the village that his daughter-in-law
turns him out of the house and gives him nothing to eat, and that he is
fed by charity; some are glad, others are sorry for him.


Varvara has grown even fatter and whiter, and as before she is active in
good works, and Aksinya does not interfere with her.


There is so much jam now that they have not time to eat it before the
fresh fruit comes in; it goes sugary, and Varvara almost sheds tears, not
knowing what to do with it.


They have begun to forget about Anisim. A letter has come from him written
in verse on a big sheet of paper as though it were a petition, all in the
same splendid handwriting. Evidently his friend Samorodov was sharing his
punishment. Under the verses in an ugly, scarcely legible handwriting
there was a single line: “I am ill here all the time; I am wretched, for
Christ’s sake help me!”


Towards evening—it was a fine autumn day—old Tsybukin was
sitting near the church gates, with the collar of his fur coat turned up
and nothing of him could be seen but his nose and the peak of his cap. At
the other end of the long seat was sitting Elizarov the contractor, and
beside him Yakov the school watchman, a toothless old man of seventy.
Crutch and the watchman were talking.


“Children ought to give food and drink to the old.... Honour thy father
and mother...” Yakov was saying with irritation, “while she, this
daughter-in-law, has turned her father-in-law out of his own house; the
old man has neither food nor drink, where is he to go? He has not had a
morsel for these three days.”


“Three days!” said Crutch, amazed.


“Here he sits and does not say a word. He has grown feeble. And why be
silent? He ought to prosecute her, they wouldn’t flatter her in the police
court.”


“Wouldn’t flatter whom?” asked Crutch, not hearing.


“What?”


“The woman’s all right, she does her best. In their line of business they
can’t get on without that... without sin, I mean....”


“From his own house,” Yakov went on with irritation. “Save up and buy your
own house, then turn people out of it! She is a nice one, to be sure! A
pla-ague!”


Tsybukin listened and did not stir.


“Whether it is your own house or others’ it makes no difference so long as
it is warm and the women don’t scold...” said Crutch, and he laughed.
“When I was young I was very fond of my Nastasya. She was a quiet woman.
And she used to be always at it: ‘Buy a house, Makaritch! Buy a house,
Makaritch! Buy a house, Makaritch!’ She was dying and yet she kept on
saying, ‘Buy yourself a racing droshky, Makaritch, that you may not have
to walk.’ And I bought her nothing but gingerbread.”


“Her husband’s deaf and stupid,” Yakov went on, not hearing Crutch; “a
regular fool, just like a goose. He can’t understand anything. Hit a goose
on the head with a stick and even then it does not understand.”


Crutch got up to go home to the factory. Yakov also got up, and both of
them went off together, still talking. When they had gone fifty paces old
Tsybukin got up, too, and walked after them, stepping uncertainly as
though on slippery ice.


The village was already plunged in the dusk of evening and the sun only
gleamed on the upper part of the road which ran wriggling like a snake up
the slope. Old women were coming back from the woods and children with
them; they were bringing baskets of mushrooms. Peasant women and girls
came in a crowd from the station where they had been loading the trucks
with bricks, and their noses and their cheeks under their eyes were
covered with red brick-dust. They were singing. Ahead of them all was Lipa
singing in a high voice, with her eyes turned upwards to the sky, breaking
into trills as though triumphant and ecstatic that at last the day was
over and she could rest. In the crowd was her mother Praskovya, who was
walking with a bundle in her arms and breathless as usual.


“Good-evening, Makaritch!” cried Lipa, seeing Crutch. “Good-evening,
darling!”


“Good-evening, Lipinka,” cried Crutch delighted. “Dear girls and women,
love the rich carpenter! Ho-ho! My little children, my little children.
(Crutch gave a gulp.) My dear little axes!”


Crutch and Yakov went on further and could still be heard talking. Then
after them the crowd was met by old Tsybukin and there was a sudden hush.
Lipa and Praskovya had dropped a little behind, and when the old man was
on a level with them Lipa bowed down low and said:


“Good-evening, Grigory Petrovitch.”


Her mother, too, bowed down. The old man stopped and, saying nothing,
looked at the two in silence; his lips were quivering and his eyes full of
tears. Lipa took out of her mother’s bundle a piece of savoury turnover
and gave it him. He took it and began eating.


The sun had by now set: its glow died away on the road above. It grew dark
and cool. Lipa and Praskovya walked on and for some time they kept
crossing themselves.








THE HUNTSMAN

A SULTRY, stifling midday. Not a cloudlet in the sky.... The sun-baked
grass had a disconsolate, hopeless look: even if there were rain it could
never be green again.... The forest stood silent, motionless, as though it
were looking at something with its tree-tops or expecting something.


At the edge of the clearing a tall, narrow-shouldered man of forty in a
red shirt, in patched trousers that had been a gentleman’s, and in high
boots, was slouching along with a lazy, shambling step. He was sauntering
along the road. On the right was the green of the clearing, on the left a
golden sea of ripe rye stretched to the very horizon. He was red and
perspiring, a white cap with a straight jockey peak, evidently a gift from
some open-handed young gentleman, perched jauntily on his handsome flaxen
head. Across his shoulder hung a game-bag with a blackcock lying in it.
The man held a double-barrelled gun cocked in his hand, and screwed up his
eyes in the direction of his lean old dog who was running on ahead
sniffing the bushes. There was stillness all round, not a sound...
everything living was hiding away from the heat.


“Yegor Vlassitch!” the huntsman suddenly heard a soft voice.


He started and, looking round, scowled. Beside him, as though she had
sprung out of the earth, stood a pale-faced woman of thirty with a sickle
in her hand. She was trying to look into his face, and was smiling
diffidently.


“Oh, it is you, Pelagea!” said the huntsman, stopping and deliberately
uncocking the gun. “H’m!... How have you come here?”


“The women from our village are working here, so I have come with them....
As a labourer, Yegor Vlassitch.”


“Oh...” growled Yegor Vlassitch, and slowly walked on.


Pelagea followed him. They walked in silence for twenty paces.


“I have not seen you for a long time, Yegor Vlassitch...” said Pelagea
looking tenderly at the huntsman’s moving shoulders. “I have not seen you
since you came into our hut at Easter for a drink of water... you came in
at Easter for a minute and then God knows how... drunk... you scolded and
beat me and went away... I have been waiting and waiting... I’ve tired my
eyes out looking for you. Ah, Yegor Vlassitch, Yegor Vlassitch! you might
look in just once!”


“What is there for me to do there?”


“Of course there is nothing for you to do... though to be sure... there is
the place to look after.... To see how things are going.... You are the
master.... I say, you have shot a blackcock, Yegor Vlassitch! You ought to
sit down and rest!”


As she said all this Pelagea laughed like a silly girl and looked up at
Yegor’s face. Her face was simply radiant with happiness.


“Sit down? If you like...” said Yegor in a tone of indifference, and he
chose a spot between two fir-trees. “Why are you standing? You sit down
too.”


Pelagea sat a little way off in the sun and, ashamed of her joy, put her
hand over her smiling mouth. Two minutes passed in silence.


“You might come for once,” said Pelagea.


“What for?” sighed Yegor, taking off his cap and wiping his red forehead
with his hand. “There is no object in my coming. To go for an hour or two
is only waste of time, it’s simply upsetting you, and to live continually
in the village my soul could not endure.... You know yourself I am a
pampered man.... I want a bed to sleep in, good tea to drink, and refined
conversation.... I want all the niceties, while you live in poverty and
dirt in the village.... I couldn’t stand it for a day. Suppose there were
an edict that I must live with you, I should either set fire to the hut or
lay hands on myself. From a boy I’ve had this love for ease; there is no
help for it.”


“Where are you living now?”


“With the gentleman here, Dmitry Ivanitch, as a huntsman. I furnish his
table with game, but he keeps me... more for his pleasure than anything.”


“That’s not proper work you’re doing, Yegor Vlassitch.... For other people
it’s a pastime, but with you it’s like a trade... like real work.”


“You don’t understand, you silly,” said Yegor, gazing gloomily at the sky.
“You have never understood, and as long as you live you will never
understand what sort of man I am.... You think of me as a foolish man,
gone to the bad, but to anyone who understands I am the best shot there is
in the whole district. The gentry feel that, and they have even printed
things about me in a magazine. There isn’t a man to be compared with me as
a sportsman.... And it is not because I am pampered and proud that I look
down upon your village work. From my childhood, you know, I have never had
any calling apart from guns and dogs. If they took away my gun, I used to
go out with the fishing-hook, if they took the hook I caught things with
my hands. And I went in for horse-dealing too, I used to go to the fairs
when I had the money, and you know that if a peasant goes in for being a
sportsman, or a horse-dealer, it’s good-bye to the plough. Once the spirit
of freedom has taken a man you will never root it out of him. In the same
way, if a gentleman goes in for being an actor or for any other art, he
will never make an official or a landowner. You are a woman, and you do
not understand, but one must understand that.”


“I understand, Yegor Vlassitch.”


“You don’t understand if you are going to cry....”


“I... I’m not crying,” said Pelagea, turning away. “It’s a sin, Yegor
Vlassitch! You might stay a day with luckless me, anyway. It’s twelve
years since I was married to you, and... and... there has never once been
love between us!... I... I am not crying.”


“Love...” muttered Yegor, scratching his hand. “There can’t be any love.
It’s only in name we are husband and wife; we aren’t really. In your eyes
I am a wild man, and in mine you are a simple peasant woman with no
understanding. Are we well matched? I am a free, pampered, profligate man,
while you are a working woman, going in bark shoes and never straightening
your back. The way I think of myself is that I am the foremost man in
every kind of sport, and you look at me with pity.... Is that being well
matched?”


“But we are married, you know, Yegor Vlassitch,” sobbed Pelagea.


“Not married of our free will.... Have you forgotten? You have to thank
Count Sergey Paylovitch and yourself. Out of envy, because I shot better
than he did, the Count kept giving me wine for a whole month, and when a
man’s drunk you could make him change his religion, let alone getting
married. To pay me out he married me to you when I was drunk.... A
huntsman to a herd-girl! You saw I was drunk, why did you marry me? You
were not a serf, you know; you could have resisted. Of course it was a bit
of luck for a herd-girl to marry a huntsman, but you ought to have thought
about it. Well, now be miserable, cry. It’s a joke for the Count, but a
crying matter for you.... Beat yourself against the wall.”


A silence followed. Three wild ducks flew over the clearing. Yegor
followed them with his eyes till, transformed into three scarcely visible
dots, they sank down far beyond the forest.


“How do you live?” he asked, moving his eyes from the ducks to Pelagea.


“Now I am going out to work, and in the winter I take a child from the
Foundling Hospital and bring it up on the bottle. They give me a rouble
and a half a month.”


“Oh....”


Again a silence. From the strip that had been reaped floated a soft song
which broke off at the very beginning. It was too hot to sing.


“They say you have put up a new hut for Akulina,” said Pelagea.


Yegor did not speak.


“So she is dear to you....”


“It’s your luck, it’s fate!” said the huntsman, stretching. “You must put
up with it, poor thing. But good-bye, I’ve been chattering long enough....
I must be at Boltovo by the evening.”


Yegor rose, stretched himself, and slung his gun over his shoulder;
Pelagea got up.


“And when are you coming to the village?” she asked softly.


“I have no reason to, I shall never come sober, and you have little to
gain from me drunk; I am spiteful when I am drunk. Good-bye!”


“Good-bye, Yegor Vlassitch.”


Yegor put his cap on the back of his head and, clicking to his dog, went
on his way. Pelagea stood still looking after him.... She saw his moving
shoulder-blades, his jaunty cap, his lazy, careless step, and her eyes
were full of sadness and tender affection.... Her gaze flitted over her
husband’s tall, lean figure and caressed and fondled it.... He, as though
he felt that gaze, stopped and looked round.... He did not speak, but from
his face, from his shrugged shoulders, Pelagea could see that he wanted to
say something to her. She went up to him timidly and looked at him with
imploring eyes.


“Take it,” he said, turning round.


He gave her a crumpled rouble note and walked quickly away.


“Good-bye, Yegor Vlassitch,” she said, mechanically taking the rouble.


He walked by a long road, straight as a taut strap. She, pale and
motionless as a statue, stood, her eyes seizing every step he took. But
the red of his shirt melted into the dark colour of his trousers, his step
could not be seen, and the dog could not be distinguished from the boots.
Nothing could be seen but the cap, and... suddenly Yegor turned off
sharply into the clearing and the cap vanished in the greenness.


“Good-bye, Yegor Vlassitch,” whispered Pelagea, and she stood on tiptoe to
see the white cap once more.








HAPPINESS

A FLOCK of sheep was spending the night on the broad steppe road that is
called the great highway. Two shepherds were guarding it. One, a toothless
old man of eighty, with a tremulous face, was lying on his stomach at the
very edge of the road, leaning his elbows on the dusty leaves of a
plantain; the other, a young fellow with thick black eyebrows and no
moustache, dressed in the coarse canvas of which cheap sacks are made, was
lying on his back, with his arms under his head, looking upwards at the
sky, where the stars were slumbering and the Milky Way lay stretched
exactly above his face.


The shepherds were not alone. A couple of yards from them in the dusk that
shrouded the road a horse made a patch of darkness, and, beside it,
leaning against the saddle, stood a man in high boots and a short
full-skirted jacket who looked like an overseer on some big estate.
Judging from his upright and motionless figure, from his manners, and his
behaviour to the shepherds and to his horse, he was a serious, reasonable
man who knew his own value; even in the darkness signs could be detected
in him of military carriage and of the majestically condescending
expression gained by frequent intercourse with the gentry and their
stewards.


The sheep were asleep. Against the grey background of the dawn, already
beginning to cover the eastern part of the sky, the silhouettes of sheep
that were not asleep could be seen here and there; they stood with
drooping heads, thinking. Their thoughts, tedious and oppressive, called
forth by images of nothing but the broad steppe and the sky, the days and
the nights, probably weighed upon them themselves, crushing them into
apathy; and, standing there as though rooted to the earth, they noticed
neither the presence of a stranger nor the uneasiness of the dogs.


The drowsy, stagnant air was full of the monotonous noise inseparable from
a summer night on the steppes; the grasshoppers chirruped incessantly; the
quails called, and the young nightingales trilled languidly half a mile
away in a ravine where a stream flowed and willows grew.


The overseer had halted to ask the shepherds for a light for his pipe. He
lighted it in silence and smoked the whole pipe; then, still without
uttering a word, stood with his elbow on the saddle, plunged in thought.
The young shepherd took no notice of him, he still lay gazing at the sky
while the old man slowly looked the overseer up and down and then asked:


“Why, aren’t you Panteley from Makarov’s estate?”


“That’s myself,” answered the overseer.


“To be sure, I see it is. I didn’t know you—that is a sign you will
be rich. Where has God brought you from?”


“From the Kovylyevsky fields.”


“That’s a good way. Are you letting the land on the part-crop system?”


“Part of it. Some like that, and some we are letting on lease, and some
for raising melons and cucumbers. I have just come from the mill.”


A big shaggy old sheep-dog of a dirty white colour with woolly tufts about
its nose and eyes walked three times quietly round the horse, trying to
seem unconcerned in the presence of strangers, then all at once dashed
suddenly from behind at the overseer with an angry aged growl; the other
dogs could not refrain from leaping up too.


“Lie down, you damned brute,” cried the old man, raising himself on his
elbow; “blast you, you devil’s creature.”


When the dogs were quiet again, the old man resumed his former attitude
and said quietly:


“It was at Kovyli on Ascension Day that Yefim Zhmenya died. Don’t speak of
it in the dark, it is a sin to mention such people. He was a wicked old
man. I dare say you have heard.”


“No, I haven’t.”


“Yefim Zhmenya, the uncle of Styopka, the blacksmith. The whole district
round knew him. Aye, he was a cursed old man, he was! I knew him for sixty
years, ever since Tsar Alexander who beat the French was brought from
Taganrog to Moscow. We went together to meet the dead Tsar, and in those
days the great highway did not run to Bahmut, but from Esaulovka to
Gorodishtche, and where Kovyli is now, there were bustards’ nests—there
was a bustard’s nest at every step. Even then I had noticed that Yefim had
given his soul to damnation, and that the Evil One was in him. I have
observed that if any man of the peasant class is apt to be silent, takes
up with old women’s jobs, and tries to live in solitude, there is no good
in it, and Yefim from his youth up was always one to hold his tongue and
look at you sideways, he always seemed to be sulky and bristling like a
cock before a hen. To go to church or to the tavern or to lark in the
street with the lads was not his fashion, he would rather sit alone or be
whispering with old women. When he was still young he took jobs to look
after the bees and the market gardens. Good folks would come to his market
garden sometimes and his melons were whistling. One day he caught a pike,
when folks were looking on, and it laughed aloud, ‘Ho-ho-ho-ho!’”


“It does happen,” said Panteley.


The young shepherd turned on his side and, lifting his black eyebrows,
stared intently at the old man.


“Did you hear the melons whistling?” he asked.


“Hear them I didn’t, the Lord spared me,” sighed the old man, “but folks
told me so. It is no great wonder... the Evil One will begin whistling in
a stone if he wants to. Before the Day of Freedom a rock was humming for
three days and three nights in our parts. I heard it myself. The pike
laughed because Yefim caught a devil instead of a pike.”


The old man remembered something. He got up quickly on to his knees and,
shrinking as though from the cold, nervously thrusting his hands into his
sleeves, he muttered in a rapid womanish gabble:


“Lord save us and have mercy upon us! I was walking along the river bank
one day to Novopavlovka. A storm was gathering, such a tempest it was,
preserve us Holy Mother, Queen of Heaven.... I was hurrying on as best I
could, I looked, and beside the path between the thorn bushes—the
thorn was in flower at the time—there was a white bullock coming
along. I wondered whose bullock it was, and what the devil had sent it
there for. It was coming along and swinging its tail and moo-oo-oo! but
would you believe it, friends, I overtake it, I come up close—and
it’s not a bullock, but Yefim—holy, holy, holy! I make the sign of
the cross while he stares at me and mutters, showing the whites of his
eyes; wasn’t I frightened! We came alongside, I was afraid to say a word
to him—the thunder was crashing, the sky was streaked with
lightning, the willows were bent right down to the water—all at
once, my friends, God strike me dead that I die impenitent, a hare ran
across the path... it ran and stopped, and said like a man: ‘Good-evening,
peasants.’ Lie down, you brute!” the old man cried to the shaggy dog, who
was moving round the horse again. “Plague take you!”


“It does happen,” said the overseer, still leaning on the saddle and not
stirring; he said this in the hollow, toneless voice in which men speak
when they are plunged in thought.


“It does happen,” he repeated, in a tone of profundity and conviction.


“Ugh, he was a nasty old fellow,” the old shepherd went on with somewhat
less fervour. “Five years after the Freedom he was flogged by the commune
at the office, so to show his spite he took and sent the throat illness
upon all Kovyli. Folks died out of number, lots and lots of them, just as
in cholera....”


“How did he send the illness?” asked the young shepherd after a brief
silence.


“We all know how, there is no great cleverness needed where there is a
will to it. Yefim murdered people with viper’s fat. That is such a poison
that folks will die from the mere smell of it, let alone the fat.”


“That’s true,” Panteley agreed.


“The lads wanted to kill him at the time, but the old people would not let
them. It would never have done to kill him; he knew the place where the
treasure is hidden, and not another soul did know. The treasures about
here are charmed so that you may find them and not see them, but he did
see them. At times he would walk along the river bank or in the forest,
and under the bushes and under the rocks there would be little flames,
little flames... little flames as though from brimstone. I have seen them
myself. Everyone expected that Yefim would show people the places or dig
the treasure up himself, but he—as the saying is, like a dog in the
manger—so he died without digging it up himself or showing other
people.”


The overseer lit a pipe, and for an instant lighted up his big moustaches
and his sharp, stern-looking, and dignified nose. Little circles of light
danced from his hands to his cap, raced over the saddle along the horse’s
back, and vanished in its mane near its ears.


“There are lots of hidden treasures in these parts,” he said.


And slowly stretching, he looked round him, resting his eyes on the
whitening east and added:


“There must be treasures.”


“To be sure,” sighed the old man, “one can see from every sign there are
treasures, only there is no one to dig them, brother. No one knows the
real places; besides, nowadays, you must remember, all the treasures are
under a charm. To find them and see them you must have a talisman, and
without a talisman you can do nothing, lad. Yefim had talismans, but there
was no getting anything out of him, the bald devil. He kept them, so that
no one could get them.”


The young shepherd crept two paces nearer to the old man and, propping his
head on his fists, fastened his fixed stare upon him. A childish
expression of terror and curiosity gleamed in his dark eyes, and seemed in
the twilight to stretch and flatten out the large features of his coarse
young face. He was listening intently.


“It is even written in the Scriptures that there are lots of treasures
hidden here,” the old man went on; “it is so for sure... and no mistake
about it. An old soldier of Novopavlovka was shown at Ivanovka a writing,
and in this writing it was printed about the place of the treasure and
even how many pounds of gold was in it and the sort of vessel it was in;
they would have found the treasures long ago by that writing, only the
treasure is under a spell, you can’t get at it.”


“Why can’t you get at it, grandfather?” asked the young man.


“I suppose there is some reason, the soldier didn’t say. It is under a
spell... you need a talisman.”


The old man spoke with warmth, as though he were pouring out his soul
before the overseer. He talked through his nose and, being unaccustomed to
talk much and rapidly, stuttered; and, conscious of his defects, he tried
to adorn his speech with gesticulations of the hands and head and thin
shoulders, and at every movement his hempen shirt crumpled into folds,
slipped upwards and displayed his back, black with age and sunburn. He
kept pulling it down, but it slipped up again at once. At last, as though
driven out of all patience by the rebellious shirt, the old man leaped up
and said bitterly:


“There is fortune, but what is the good of it if it is buried in the
earth? It is just riches wasted with no profit to anyone, like chaff or
sheep’s dung, and yet there are riches there, lad, fortune enough for all
the country round, but not a soul sees it! It will come to this, that the
gentry will dig it up or the government will take it away. The gentry have
begun digging the barrows.... They scented something! They are envious of
the peasants’ luck! The government, too, is looking after itself. It is
written in the law that if any peasant finds the treasure he is to take it
to the authorities! I dare say, wait till you get it! There is a brew but
not for you!”


The old man laughed contemptuously and sat down on the ground. The
overseer listened with attention and agreed, but from his silence and the
expression of his figure it was evident that what the old man told him was
not new to him, that he had thought it all over long ago, and knew much
more than was known to the old shepherd.


“In my day, I must own, I did seek for fortune a dozen times,” said the
old man, scratching himself nervously. “I looked in the right places, but
I must have come on treasures under a charm. My father looked for it, too,
and my brother, too—but not a thing did they find, so they died
without luck. A monk revealed to my brother Ilya—the Kingdom of
Heaven be his—that in one place in the fortress of Taganrog there
was a treasure under three stones, and that that treasure was under a
charm, and in those days—it was, I remember, in the year ‘38—an
Armenian used to live at Matvyeev Barrow who sold talismans. Ilya bought a
talisman, took two other fellows with him, and went to Taganrog. Only when
he got to the place in the fortress, brother, there was a soldier with a
gun, standing at the very spot....”


A sound suddenly broke on the still air, and floated in all directions
over the steppe. Something in the distance gave a menacing bang, crashed
against stone, and raced over the steppe, uttering, “Tah! tah! tah! tah!”
When the sound had died away the old man looked inquiringly at Panteley,
who stood motionless and unconcerned.


“It’s a bucket broken away at the pits,” said the young shepherd after a
moment’s thought.


It was by now getting light. The Milky Way had turned pale and gradually
melted like snow, losing its outlines; the sky was becoming dull and dingy
so that you could not make out whether it was clear or covered thickly
with clouds, and only from the bright leaden streak in the east and from
the stars that lingered here and there could one tell what was coming.


The first noiseless breeze of morning, cautiously stirring the spurges and
the brown stalks of last year’s grass, fluttered along the road.


The overseer roused himself from his thoughts and tossed his head. With
both hands he shook the saddle, touched the girth and, as though he could
not make up his mind to mount the horse, stood still again, hesitating.


“Yes,” he said, “your elbow is near, but you can’t bite it. There is
fortune, but there is not the wit to find it.”


And he turned facing the shepherds. His stern face looked sad and mocking,
as though he were a disappointed man.


“Yes, so one dies without knowing what happiness is like...” he said
emphatically, lifting his left leg into the stirrup. “A younger man may
live to see it, but it is time for us to lay aside all thought of it.”


Stroking his long moustaches covered with dew, he seated himself heavily
on the horse and screwed up his eyes, looking into the distance, as though
he had forgotten something or left something unsaid. In the bluish
distance where the furthest visible hillock melted into the mist nothing
was stirring; the ancient barrows, once watch-mounds and tombs, which rose
here and there above the horizon and the boundless steppe had a sullen and
death-like look; there was a feeling of endless time and utter
indifference to man in their immobility and silence; another thousand
years would pass, myriads of men would die, while they would still stand
as they had stood, with no regret for the dead nor interest in the
living, and no soul would ever know why they stood there, and what secret
of the steppes was hidden under them.


The rooks awakening, flew one after another in silence over the earth. No
meaning was to be seen in the languid flight of those long-lived birds,
nor in the morning which is repeated punctually every twenty-four hours,
nor in the boundless expanse of the steppe.


The overseer smiled and said:


“What space, Lord have mercy upon us! You would have a hunt to find
treasure in it! Here,” he went on, dropping his voice and making a serious
face, “here there are two treasures buried for a certainty. The gentry
don’t know of them, but the old peasants, particularly the soldiers, know
all about them. Here, somewhere on that ridge [the overseer pointed with
his whip] robbers one time attacked a caravan of gold; the gold was being
taken from Petersburg to the Emperor Peter who was building a fleet at the
time at Voronezh. The robbers killed the men with the caravan and buried
the gold, but did not find it again afterwards. Another treasure was
buried by our Cossacks of the Don. In the year ‘12 they carried off lots
of plunder of all sorts from the French, goods and gold and silver. When
they were going homewards they heard on the way that the government wanted
to take away all the gold and silver from them. Rather than give up their
plunder like that to the government for nothing, the brave fellows took
and buried it, so that their children, anyway, might get it; but where
they buried it no one knows.”


“I have heard of those treasures,” the old man muttered grimly.


“Yes...” Panteley pondered again. “So it is....”


A silence followed. The overseer looked dreamily into the distance, gave a
laugh and pulled the rein, still with the same expression as though he had
forgotten something or left something unsaid. The horse reluctantly
started at a walking pace. After riding a hundred paces Panteley shook his
head resolutely, roused himself from his thoughts and, lashing his horse,
set off at a trot.


The shepherds were left alone.


“That was Panteley from Makarov’s estate,” said the old man. “He gets a
hundred and fifty a year and provisions found, too. He is a man of
education....”


The sheep, waking up—there were about three thousand of them—began
without zest to while away the time, nipping at the low, half-trampled
grass. The sun had not yet risen, but by now all the barrows could be seen
and, like a cloud in the distance, Saur’s Grave with its peaked top. If
one clambered up on that tomb one could see the plain from it, level and
boundless as the sky, one could see villages, manor-houses, the
settlements of the Germans and of the Molokani, and a long-sighted Kalmuck
could even see the town and the railway-station. Only from there could one
see that there was something else in the world besides the silent steppe
and the ancient barrows, that there was another life that had nothing to
do with buried treasure and the thoughts of sheep.


The old man felt beside him for his crook—a long stick with a hook
at the upper end—and got up. He was silent and thoughtful. The young
shepherd’s face had not lost the look of childish terror and curiosity. He
was still under the influence of what he had heard in the night, and
impatiently awaiting fresh stories.


“Grandfather,” he asked, getting up and taking his crook, “what did your
brother Ilya do with the soldier?”


The old man did not hear the question. He looked absent-mindedly at the
young man, and answered, mumbling with his lips:


“I keep thinking, Sanka, about that writing that was shown to that soldier
at Ivanovka. I didn’t tell Panteley—God be with him—but you
know in that writing the place was marked out so that even a woman could
find it. Do you know where it is? At Bogata Bylotchka at the spot, you
know, where the ravine parts like a goose’s foot into three little
ravines; it is the middle one.”


“Well, will you dig?”


“I will try my luck...”


“And, grandfather, what will you do with the treasure when you find it?”


“Do with it?” laughed the old man. “H’m!... If only I could find it
then.... I would show them all.... H’m!... I should know what to do....”


And the old man could not answer what he would do with the treasure if he
found it. That question had presented itself to him that morning probably
for the first time in his life, and judging from the expression of his
face, indifferent and uncritical, it did not seem to him important and
deserving of consideration. In Sanka’s brain another puzzled question was
stirring: why was it only old men searched for hidden treasure, and what
was the use of earthly happiness to people who might die any day of old
age? But Sanka could not put this perplexity into words, and the old man
could scarcely have found an answer to it.


An immense crimson sun came into view surrounded by a faint haze. Broad
streaks of light, still cold, bathing in the dewy grass, lengthening out
with a joyous air as though to prove they were not weary of their task,
began spreading over the earth. The silvery wormwood, the blue flowers of
the pig’s onion, the yellow mustard, the corn-flowers—all burst into
gay colours, taking the sunlight for their own smile.


The old shepherd and Sanka parted and stood at the further sides of the
flock. Both stood like posts, without moving, staring at the ground and
thinking. The former was haunted by thoughts of fortune, the latter was
pondering on what had been said in the night; what interested him was not
the fortune itself, which he did not want and could not imagine, but the
fantastic, fairy-tale character of human happiness.


A hundred sheep started and, in some inexplicable panic as at a signal,
dashed away from the flock; and as though the thoughts of the sheep—tedious
and oppressive—had for a moment infected Sanka also, he, too, dashed
aside in the same inexplicable animal panic, but at once he recovered
himself and shouted:


“You crazy creatures! You’ve gone mad, plague take you!”


When the sun, promising long hours of overwhelming heat, began to bake the
earth, all living things that in the night had moved and uttered sounds
were sunk in drowsiness. The old shepherd and Sanka stood with their
crooks on opposite sides of the flock, stood without stirring, like fakirs
at their prayers, absorbed in thought. They did not heed each other; each
of them was living in his own life. The sheep were pondering, too.








A MALEFACTOR

AN exceedingly lean little peasant, in a striped hempen shirt and patched
drawers, stands facing the investigating magistrate. His face overgrown
with hair and pitted with smallpox, and his eyes scarcely visible under
thick, overhanging eyebrows have an expression of sullen moroseness. On
his head there is a perfect mop of tangled, unkempt hair, which gives him
an even more spider-like air of moroseness. He is barefooted.


“Denis Grigoryev!” the magistrate begins. “Come nearer, and answer my
questions. On the seventh of this July the railway watchman, Ivan
Semyonovitch Akinfov, going along the line in the morning, found you at
the hundred-and-forty-first mile engaged in unscrewing a nut by which the
rails are made fast to the sleepers. Here it is, the nut!... With the
aforesaid nut he detained you. Was that so?”


“Wha-at?”


“Was this all as Akinfov states?”


“To be sure, it was.”


“Very good; well, what were you unscrewing the nut for?”


“Wha-at?”


“Drop that ‘wha-at’ and answer the question; what were you unscrewing the
nut for?”


“If I hadn’t wanted it I shouldn’t have unscrewed it,” croaks Denis,
looking at the ceiling.


“What did you want that nut for?”


“The nut? We make weights out of those nuts for our lines.”


“Who is ‘we’?”


“We, people.... The Klimovo peasants, that is.”


“Listen, my man; don’t play the idiot to me, but speak sensibly. It’s no
use telling lies here about weights!”


“I’ve never been a liar from a child, and now I’m telling lies...” mutters
Denis, bJlinking. “But can you do without a weight, your honour? If you put
live bait or maggots on a hook, would it go to the bottom without a
weight?... I am telling lies,” grins Denis.... “What the devil is the use
of the worm if it swims on the surface! The perch and the pike and the
eel-pout always go to the bottom, and a bait on the surface is only taken
by a shillisper, not very often then, and there are no shillispers in our
river.... That fish likes plenty of room.”


“Why are you telling me about shillispers?”


“Wha-at? Why, you asked me yourself! The gentry catch fish that way too in
our parts. The silliest little boy would not try to catch a fish without a
weight. Of course anyone who did not understand might go to fish without a
weight. There is no rule for a fool.”


“So you say you unscrewed this nut to make a weight for your fishing line
out of it?”


“What else for? It wasn’t to play knuckle-bones with!”


“But you might have taken lead, a bullet... a nail of some sort....”


“You don’t pick up lead in the road, you have to buy it, and a nail’s no
good. You can’t find anything better than a nut.... It’s heavy, and
there’s a hole in it.”


“He keeps pretending to be a fool! as though he’d been born yesterday or
dropped from heaven! Don’t you understand, you blockhead, what unscrewing
these nuts leads to? If the watchman had not noticed it the train might
have run off the rails, people would have been killed—you would have
killed people.”


“God forbid, your honour! What should I kill them for? Are we heathens or
wicked people? Thank God, good gentlemen, we have lived all our lives
without ever dreaming of such a thing.... Save, and have mercy on us,
Queen of Heaven!... What are you saying?”


“And what do you suppose railway accidents do come from? Unscrew two or
three nuts and you have an accident.”


Denis grins, and screws up his eye at the magistrate incredulously.


“Why! how many years have we all in the village been unscrewing nuts, and
the Lord has been merciful; and you talk of accidents, killing people. If
I had carried away a rail or put a log across the line, say, then maybe it
might have upset the train, but... pouf! a nut!”


“But you must understand that the nut holds the rail fast to the
sleepers!”


“We understand that.... We don’t unscrew them all... we leave some.... We
don’t do it thoughtlessly... we understand....”


Denis yawns and makes the sign of the cross over his mouth.


“Last year the train went off the rails here,” says the magistrate. “Now I
see why!”


“What do you say, your honour?”


“I am telling you that now I see why the train went off the rails last
year.... I understand!”


“That’s what you are educated people for, to understand, you kind
gentlemen. The Lord knows to whom to give understanding.... Here you have
reasoned how and what, but the watchman, a peasant like ourselves, with no
understanding at all, catches one by the collar and hauls one along....
You should reason first and then haul me off. It’s a saying that a peasant
has a peasant’s wit.... Write down, too, your honour, that he hit me twice—in
the jaw and in the chest.”


“When your hut was searched they found another nut.... At what spot did
you unscrew that, and when?”


“You mean the nut which lay under the red box?”


“I don’t know where it was lying, only it was found. When did you unscrew
it?”


“I didn’t unscrew it; Ignashka, the son of one-eyed Semyon, gave it me. I
mean the one which was under the box, but the one which was in the sledge
in the yard Mitrofan and I unscrewed together.”


“What Mitrofan?”


“Mitrofan Petrov.... Haven’t you heard of him? He makes nets in our
village and sells them to the gentry. He needs a lot of those nuts. Reckon
a matter of ten for each net.”


“Listen. Article 1081 of the Penal Code lays down that every wilful damage
of the railway line committed when it can expose the traffic on that line
to danger, and the guilty party knows that an accident must be caused by
it... (Do you understand? Knows! And you could not help knowing what this
unscrewing would lead to...) is liable to penal servitude.”


“Of course, you know best.... We are ignorant people.... What do we
understand?”


“You understand all about it! You are lying, shamming!”


“What should I lie for? Ask in the village if you don’t believe me. Only a
bleak is caught without a weight, and there is no fish worse than a
gudgeon, yet even that won’t bite without a weight.”


“You’d better tell me about the shillisper next,” said the magistrate,
smiling.


“There are no shillispers in our parts.... We cast our line without a
weight on the top of the water with a butterfly; a mullet may be caught
that way, though that is not often.”


“Come, hold your tongue.”


A silence follows. Denis shifts from one foot to the other, looks at the
table with the green cloth on it, and bJlinks his eyes violently as though
what was before him was not the cloth but the sun. The magistrate writes
rapidly.


“Can I go?” asks Denis after a long silence.


“No. I must take you under guard and send you to prison.”


Denis leaves off bJlinking and, raising his thick eyebrows, looks
inquiringly at the magistrate.


“How do you mean, to prison? Your honour! I have no time to spare, I must
go to the fair; I must get three roubles from Yegor for some tallow!...”


“Hold your tongue; don’t interrupt.”


“To prison.... If there was something to go for, I’d go; but just to go
for nothing! What for? I haven’t stolen anything, I believe, and I’ve not
been fighting.... If you are in doubt about the arrears, your honour,
don’t believe the elder.... You ask the agent... he’s a regular heathen,
the elder, you know.”


“Hold your tongue.”


“I am holding my tongue, as it is,” mutters Denis; “but that the elder has
lied over the account, I’ll take my oath for it.... There are three of us
brothers: Kuzma Grigoryev, then Yegor Grigoryev, and me, Denis Grigoryev.”


“You are hindering me.... Hey, Semyon,” cries the magistrate, “take him
away!”


“There are three of us brothers,” mutters Denis, as two stalwart soldiers
take him and lead him out of the room. “A brother is not responsible for a
brother. Kuzma does not pay, so you, Denis, must answer for it.... Judges
indeed! Our master the general is dead—the Kingdom of Heaven be his—or
he would have shown you judges.... You ought to judge sensibly, not at
random.... Flog if you like, but flog someone who deserves it, flog with
conscience.”








PEASANTS


I

NIKOLAY TCHIKILDYEEV, a waiter in the Moscow hotel, Slavyansky Bazaar, was
taken ill. His legs went numb and his gait was affected, so that on one
occasion, as he was going along the corridor, he tumbled and fell down
with a tray full of ham and peas. He had to leave his job. All his own
savings and his wife’s were spent on doctors and medicines; they had
nothing left to live upon. He felt dull with no work to do, and he made up
his mind he must go home to the village. It is better to be ill at home,
and living there is cheaper; and it is a true saying that the walls of
home are a help.


He reached Zhukovo towards evening. In his memories of childhood he had
pictured his home as bright, snug, comfortable. Now, going into the hut,
he was positively frightened; it was so dark, so crowded, so unclean. His
wife Olga and his daughter Sasha, who had come with him, kept looking in
bewilderment at the big untidy stove, which filled up almost half the hut
and was black with soot and flies. What lots of flies! The stove was on
one side, the beams lay slanting on the walls, and it looked as though the
hut were just going to fall to pieces. In the corner, facing the door,
under the holy images, bottle labels and newspaper cuttings were stuck on
the walls instead of pictures. The poverty, the poverty! Of the grown-up
people there were none at home; all were at work at the harvest. On the
stove was sitting a white-headed girl of eight, unwashed and apathetic;
she did not even glance at them as they came in. On the floor a white cat
was rubbing itself against the oven fork.


“Puss, puss!” Sasha called to her. “Puss!”


“She can’t hear,” said the little girl; “she has gone deaf.”


“How is that?”


“Oh, she was beaten.”


Nikolay and Olga realized from the firs t glance what life was like here,
but said nothing to one another; in silence they put down their bundles,
and went out into the village street. Their hut was the third from the
end, and seemed the very poorest and oldest-looking; the second was not
much better; but the last one had an iron roof, and curtains in the
windows. That hut stood apart, not enclosed; it was a tavern. The huts
were in a single row, and the whole of the little village—quiet and
dreamy, with willows, elders, and mountain-ash trees peeping out from the
yards—had an attractive look.


Beyond the peasants homesteads there was a slope down to the river, so
steep and precipitous that huge stones jutted out bare here and there
through the clay. Down the slope, among the stones and holes dug by the
potters, ran winding paths; bits of broken pottery, some brown, some red,
lay piled up in heaps, and below there stretched a broad, level, bright
green meadow, from which the hay had been already carried, and in which
the peasants’ cattle were wandering. The river, three-quarters of a mile
from the village, ran twisting and turning, with beautiful leafy banks;
beyond it was again a broad meadow, a herd of cattle, long strings of
white geese; then, just as on the near side, a steep ascent uphill, and on
the top of the hill a hamlet, and a church with five domes, and at a
little distance the manor-house.


“It’s lovely here in your parts!” said Olga, crossing herself at the sight
of the church. “What space, oh Lord!”


Just at that moment the bell began ringing for service (it was Saturday
evening). Two little girls, down below, who were dragging up a pail of
water, looked round at the church to listen to the bell.


“At this time they are serving the dinners at the Slavyansky Bazaar,” said
Nikolay dreamily.


Sitting on the edge of the slope, Nikolay and Olga watched the sun
setting, watched the gold and crimson sky reflected in the river, in the
church windows, and in the whole air—which was soft and still and
unutterably pure as it never was in Moscow. And when the sun had set the
flocks and herds passed, bleating and lowing; geese flew across from the
further side of the river, and all sank into silence; the soft light died
away in the air, and the dusk of evening began quickly moving down upon
them.


Meanwhile Nikolay’s father and mother, two gaunt, bent, toothless old
people, just of the same height, came back. The women—the
sisters-in-law Marya and Fyokla—who had been working on the
landowner’s estate beyond the river, arrived home, too. Marya, the wife of
Nikolay’s brother Kiryak, had six children, and Fyokla, the wife of
Nikolay’s brother Denis—who had gone for a soldier—had two;
and when Nikolay, going into the hut, saw all the family, all those bodies
big and little moving about on the lockers, in the hanging cradles and in
all the corners, and when he saw the greed with which the old father and
the women ate the black bread, dipping it in water, he realized he had
made a mistake in coming here, sick, penniless, and with a family, too—a
great mistake!


“And where is Kiryak?” he asked after they had exchanged greetings.


“He is in service at the merchant’s,” answered his father; “a keeper in
the woods. He is not a bad peasant, but too fond of his glass.”


“He is no great help!” said the old woman tearfully. “Our men are a
grievous lot; they bring nothing into the house, but take plenty out.
Kiryak drinks, and so does the old man; it is no use hiding a sin; he
knows his way to the tavern. The Heavenly Mother is wroth.”


In honour of the visitors they brought out the samovar. The tea smelt of
fish; the sugar was grey and looked as though it had been nibbled;
cockroaches ran to and fro over the bread and among the crockery. It was
disgusting to drink, and the conversation was disgusting, too—about
nothing but poverty and illnesses. But before they had time to empty their
first cups there came a loud, prolonged, drunken shout from the yard:


“Ma-arya!”


“It looks as though Kiryak were coming,” said the old man. “Speak of the
devil.”


All were hushed. And again, soon afterwards, the same shout, coarse and
drawn-out as though it came out of the earth:


“Ma-arya!”


Marya, the elder sister-in-law, turned pale and huddled against the stove,
and it was strange to see the look of terror on the face of the strong,
broad-shouldered, ugly woman. Her daughter, the child who had been sitting
on the stove and looked so apathetic, suddenly broke into loud weeping.


“What are you howling for, you plague?” Fyokla, a handsome woman, also
strong and broad-shouldered, shouted to her. “He won’t kill you, no fear!”


From his old father Nikolay learned that Marya was afraid to live in the
forest with Kiryak, and that when he was drunk he always came for her,
made a row, and beat her mercilessly.


“Ma-arya!” the shout sounded close to the door.


“Protect me, for Christ’s sake, good people!” faltered Marya, breathing as
though she had been plunged into very cold water. “Protect me, kind
people....”


All the children in the hut began crying, and looking at them, Sasha, too,
began to cry. They heard a drunken cough, and a tall, black-bearded
peasant wearing a winter cap came into the hut, and was the more terrible
because his face could not be seen in the dim light of the little lamp. It
was Kiryak. Going up to his wife, he swung his arm and punched her in the
face with his fist. Stunned by the blow, she did not utter a sound, but
sat down, and her nose instantly began bleeding.


“What a disgrace! What a disgrace!” muttered the old man, clambering up on
to the stove. “Before visitors, too! It’s a sin!”


The old mother sat silent, bowed, lost in thought; Fyokla rocked the
cradle.


Evidently conscious of inspiring fear, and pleased at doing so, Kiryak
seized Marya by the arm, dragged her towards the door, and bellowed like
an animal in order to seem still more terrible; but at that moment he
suddenly caught sight of the visitors and stopped.


“Oh, they have come,...” he said, letting his wife go; “my own brother and
his family....”


Staggering and opening wide his red, drunken eyes, he said his prayer
before the image and went on:


“My brother and his family have come to the parental home... from Moscow,
I suppose. The great capital Moscow, to be sure, the mother of cities....
Excuse me.”


He sank down on the bench near the samovar and began drinking tea, sipping
it loudly from the saucer in the midst of general silence.... He drank off
a dozen cups, then reclined on the bench and began snoring.


They began going to bed. Nikolay, as an invalid, was put on the stove with
his old father; Sasha lay down on the floor, while Olga went with the
other women into the barn.


“Aye, aye, dearie,” she said, lying down on the hay beside Marya; “you
won’t mend your trouble with tears. Bear it in patience, that is all. It
is written in the Scriptures: ‘If anyone smite thee on the right cheek,
offer him the left one also.’... Aye, aye, dearie.”


Then in a low singsong murmur she told them about Moscow, about her own
life, how she had been a servant in furnished lodgings.


“And in Moscow the houses are big, built of brick,” she said; “and there
are ever so many churches, forty times forty, dearie; and they are all
gentry in the houses, so handsome and so proper!”


Marya told her that she had not only never been in Moscow, but had not
even been in their own district town; she could not read or write, and
knew no prayers, not even “Our Father.” Both she and Fyokla, the other
sister-in-law, who was sitting a little way off listening, were extremely
ignorant and could understand nothing. They both disliked their husbands;
Marya was afraid of Kiryak, and whenever he stayed with her she was
shaking with fear, and always got a headache from the fumes of vodka and
tobacco with which he reeked. And in answer to the question whether she
did not miss her husband, Fyokla answered with vexation:


“Miss him!”


They talked a little and sank into silence.


It was cool, and a cock crowed at the top of his voice near the barn,
preventing them from sleeping. When the bluish morning light was already
peeping through all the crevices, Fyokla got up stealthily and went out,
and then they heard the sound of her bare feet running off somewhere.


II


Olga went to church, and took Marya with her. As they went down the path
towards the meadow both were in good spirits. Olga liked the wide view,
and Marya felt that in her sister-in-law she had someone near and akin to
her. The sun was rising. Low down over the meadow floated a drowsy hawk.
The river looked gloomy; there was a haze hovering over it here and there,
but on the further bank a streak of light already stretched across the
hill. The church was gleaming, and in the manor garden the rooks were
cawing furiously.


“The old man is all right,” Marya told her, “but Granny is strict; she is
continually nagging. Our own grain lasted till Carnival. We buy flour now
at the tavern. She is angry about it; she says we eat too much.”


“Aye, aye, dearie! Bear it in patience, that is all. It is written: ‘Come
unto Me, all ye that labour and are heavy laden.’”


Olga spoke sedately, rhythmically, and she walked like a pilgrim woman,
with a rapid, anxious step. Every day she read the gospel, read it aloud
like a deacon; a great deal of it she did not understand, but the words of
the gospel moved her to tears, and words like “forasmuch as” and “verily”
she pronounced with a sweet flutter at her heart. She believed in God, in
the Holy Mother, in the Saints; she believed one must not offend anyone in
the world—not simple folks, nor Germans, nor gypsies, nor Jews—and
woe even to those who have no compassion on the beasts. She believed this
was written in the Holy Scriptures; and so, when she pronounced phrases
from Holy Writ, even though she did not understand them, her face grew
softened, compassionate, and radiant.


“What part do you come from?” Marya asked her.


“I am from Vladimir. Only I was taken to Moscow long ago, when I was eight
years old.”


They reached the river. On the further side a woman was standing at the
water’s edge, undressing.


“It’s our Fyokla,” said Marya, recognizing her. “She has been over the
river to the manor yard. To the stewards. She is a shameless hussy and
foul-mouthed—fearfully!”


Fyokla, young and vigorous as a girl, with her black eyebrows and her
loose hair, jumped off the bank and began splashing the water with her
feet, and waves ran in all directions from her.


“Shameless—dreadfully!” repeated Marya.


The river was crossed by a rickety little bridge of logs, and exactly
below it in the clear, limpid water was a shoal of broad-headed mullets.
The dew was glistening on the green bushes that looked into the water.
There was a feeling of warmth; it was comforting! What a lovely morning!
And how lovely life would have been in this world, in all likelihood, if
it were not for poverty, horrible, hopeless poverty, from which one can
find no refuge! One had only to look round at the village to remember
vividly all that had happened the day before, and the illusion of
happiness which seemed to surround them vanished instantly.


They reached the church. Marya stood at the entrance, and did not dare to
go farther. She did not dare to sit down either. Though they only began
ringing for mass between eight and nine, she remained standing the whole
time.


While the gospel was being read the crowd suddenly parted to make way for
the family from the great house. Two young girls in white frocks and
wide-brimmed hats walked in; with them a chubby, rosy boy in a sailor
suit. Their appearance touched Olga; she made up her mind from the first
glance that they were refined, well-educated, handsome people. Marya
looked at them from under her brows, sullenly, dejectedly, as though they
were not human beings coming in, but monsters who might crush her if she
did not make way for them.


And every time the deacon boomed out something in his bass voice she
fancied she heard “Ma-arya!” and she shuddered.


III


The arrival of the visitors was already known in the village, and directly
after mass a number of people gathered together in the hut. The
Leonytchevs and Matvyeitchevs and the Ilyitchovs came to inquire about
their relations who were in service in Moscow. All the lads of Zhukovo who
could read and write were packed off to Moscow and hired out as butlers or
waiters (while from the village on the other side of the river the boys
all became bakers), and that had been the custom from the days of serfdom
long ago when a certain Luka Ivanitch, a peasant from Zhukovo, now a
legendary figure, who had been a waiter in one of the Moscow clubs, would
take none but his fellow-villagers into his service, and found jobs for
them in taverns and restaurants; and from that time the village of Zhukovo
was always called among the inhabitants of the surrounding districts
Slaveytown. Nikolay had been taken to Moscow when he was eleven, and Ivan
Makaritch, one of the Matvyeitchevs, at that time a headwaiter in the
“Hermitage” garden, had put him into a situation. And now, addressing the
Matvyeitchevs, Nikolay said emphatically:


“Ivan Makaritch was my benefactor, and I am bound to pray for him day and
night, as it is owing to him I have become a good man.”


“My good soul!” a tall old woman, the sister of Ivan Makaritch, said
tearfully, “and not a word have we heard about him, poor dear.”


“In the winter he was in service at Omon’s, and this season there was a
rumour he was somewhere out of town, in gardens.... He has aged! In old
days he would bring home as much as ten roubles a day in the summer-time,
but now things are very quiet everywhere. The old man frets.”


The women looked at Nikolay’s feet, shod in felt boots, and at his pale
face, and said mournfully:


“You are not one to get on, Nikolay Osipitch; you are not one to get on!
No, indeed!”


And they all made much of Sasha. She was ten years old, but she was little
and very thin, and might have been taken for no more than seven. Among the
other little girls, with their sunburnt faces and roughly cropped hair,
dressed in long faded smocks, she with her white little face, with her big
dark eyes, with a red ribbon in her hair, looked funny, as though she were
some little wild creature that had been caught and brought into the hut.


“She can read, too,” Olga said in her praise, looking tenderly at her
daughter. “Read a little, child!” she said, taking the gospel from the
corner. “You read, and the good Christian people will listen.”


The testament was an old and heavy one in leather binding, with
dog’s-eared edges, and it exhaled a smell as though monks had come into
the hut. Sasha raised her eyebrows and began in a loud rhythmic chant:


“‘And the angel of the Lord... appeared unto Joseph, saying unto him: Rise
up, and take the Babe and His mother.’”


“The Babe and His mother,” Olga repeated, and flushed all over with
emotion.


“‘And flee into Egypt,... and tarry there until such time as...’”


At the word “tarry” Olga could not refrain from tears. Looking at her,
Marya began to whimper, and after her Ivan Makaritch’s sister. The old
father cleared his throat, and bustled about to find something to give his
grand-daughter, but, finding nothing, gave it up with a wave of his hand.
And when the reading was over the neighbours dispersed to their homes,
feeling touched and very much pleased with Olga and Sasha.


As it was a holiday, the family spent the whole day at home. The old
woman, whom her husband, her daughters-in-law, her grandchildren all alike
called Granny, tried to do everything herself; she heated the stove and
set the samovar with her own hands, even waited at the midday meal, and
then complained that she was worn out with work. And all the time she was
uneasy for fear someone should eat a piece too much, or that her husband
and daughters-in-law would sit idle. At one time she would hear the
tavern-keeper’s geese going at the back of the huts to her kitchen-garden,
and she would run out of the hut with a long stick and spend half an hour
screaming shrilly by her cabbages, which were as gaunt and scraggy as
herself; at another time she fancied that a crow had designs on her
chickens, and she rushed to attack it with loud words of abuse. She was
cross and grumbling from morning till night. And often she raised such an
outcry that passers-by stopped in the street.


She was not affectionate towards the old man, reviling him as a lazy-bones
and a plague. He was not a responsible, reliable peasant, and perhaps if
she had not been continually nagging at him he would not have worked at
all, but would have simply sat on the stove and talked. He talked to his
son at great length about certain enemies of his, complained of the
insults he said he had to put up with every day from the neighbours, and
it was tedious to listen to him.


“Yes,” he would say, standing with his arms akimbo, “yes.... A week after
the Exaltation of the Cross I sold my hay willingly at thirty kopecks a
pood.... Well and good.... So you see I was taking the hay in the morning
with a good will; I was interfering with no one. In an unlucky hour I see
the village elder, Antip Syedelnikov, coming out of the tavern. ‘Where are
you taking it, you ruffian?’ says he, and takes me by the ear.”


Kiryak had a fearful headache after his drinking bout, and was ashamed to
face his brother.


“What vodka does! Ah, my God!” he muttered, shaking his aching head. “For
Christ’s sake, forgive me, brother and sister; I’m not happy myself.”


As it was a holiday, they bought a herring at the tavern and made a soup
of the herring’s head. At midday they all sat down to drink tea, and went
on drinking it for a long time, till they were all perspiring; they looked
positively swollen from the tea-drinking, and after it began sipping the
broth from the herring’s head, all helping themselves out of one bowl. But
the herring itself Granny had hidden.


In the evening a potter began firing pots on the ravine. In the meadow
below the girls got up a choral dance and sang songs. They played the
concertina. And on the other side of the river a kiln for baking pots was
lighted, too, and the girls sang songs, and in the distance the singing
sounded soft and musical. The peasants were noisy in and about the tavern.
They were singing with drunken voices, each on his own account, and
swearing at one another, so that Olga could only shudder and say:


“Oh, holy Saints!”


She was amazed that the abuse was incessant, and those who were loudest
and most persistent in this foul language were the old men who were so
near their end. And the girls and children heard the swearing, and were
not in the least disturbed by it, and it was evident that they were used
to it from their cradles.


It was past midnight, the kilns on both sides of the river were put out,
but in the meadow below and in the tavern the merrymaking still went on.
The old father and Kiryak, both drunk, walking arm-in-arm and jostling
against each other’s shoulders, went to the barn where Olga and Marya were
lying.


“Let her alone,” the old man persuaded him; “let her alone.... She is a
harmless woman.... It’s a sin....”


“Ma-arya!” shouted Kiryak.


“Let her be.... It’s a sin.... She is not a bad woman.”


Both stopped by the barn and went on.


“I lo-ove the flowers of the fi-ield,” the old man began singing suddenly
in a high, piercing tenor. “I lo-ove to gather them in the meadows!”


Then he spat, and with a filthy oath went into the hut.


IV


Granny put Sasha by her kitchen-garden and told her to keep watch that the
geese did not go in. It was a hot August day. The tavernkeeper’s geese
could make their way into the kitchen-garden by the backs of the huts, but
now they were busily engaged picking up oats by the tavern, peacefully
conversing together, and only the gander craned his head high as though
trying to see whether the old woman were coming with her stick. The other
geese might come up from below, but they were now grazing far away the
other side of the river, stretched out in a long white garland about the
meadow. Sasha stood about a little, grew weary, and, seeing that the geese
were not coming, went away to the ravine.


There she saw Marya’s eldest daughter Motka, who was standing motionless
on a big stone, staring at the church. Marya had given birth to thirteen
children, but she only had six living, all girls, not one boy, and the
eldest was eight. Motka in a long smock was standing barefooted in the
full sunshine; the sun was blazing down right on her head, but she did not
notice that, and seemed as though turned to stone. Sasha stood beside her
and said, looking at the church:


“God lives in the church. Men have lamps and candles, but God has little
green and red and blue lamps like little eyes. At night God walks about
the church, and with Him the Holy Mother of God and Saint Nikolay, thud,
thud, thud!... And the watchman is terrified, terrified! Aye, aye,
dearie,” she added, imitating her mother. “And when the end of the world
comes all the churches will be carried up to heaven.”


“With the-ir be-ells?” Motka asked in her deep voice, drawling every
syllable.


“With their bells. And when the end of the world comes the good will go to
Paradise, but the angry will burn in fire eternal and unquenchable,
dearie. To my mother as well as to Marya God will say: ‘You never offended
anyone, and for that go to the right to Paradise’; but to Kiryak and
Granny He will say: ‘You go to the left into the fire.’ And anyone who has
eaten meat in Lent will go into the fire, too.”


She looked upwards at the sky, opening wide her eyes, and said:


“Look at the sky without winking, you will see angels.”


Motka began looking at the sky, too, and a minute passed in silence.


“Do you see them?” asked Sasha.


“I don’t,” said Motka in her deep voice.


“But I do. Little angels are flying about the sky and flap, flap with
their little wings as though they were gnats.”


Motka thought for a little, with her eyes on the ground, and asked:


“Will Granny burn?”


“She will, dearie.”


From the stone an even gentle slope ran down to the bottom, covered with
soft green grass, which one longed to lie down on or to touch with one’s
hands... Sasha lay down and rolled to the bottom. Motka with a grave,
severe face, taking a deep breath, lay down, too, and rolled to the
bottom, and in doing so tore her smock from the hem to the shoulder.


“What fun it is!” said Sasha, delighted.


They walked up to the top to roll down again, but at that moment they
heard a shrill, familiar voice. Oh, how awful it was! Granny, a toothless,
bony, hunchbacked figure, with short grey hair which was fluttering in the
wind, was driving the geese out of the kitchen-garden with a long stick,
shouting.


“They have trampled all the cabbages, the damned brutes! I’d cut your
throats, thrice accursed plagues! Bad luck to you!”


She saw the little girls, flung down the stick and picked up a switch,
and, seizing Sasha by the neck with her fingers, thin and hard as the
gnarled branches of a tree, began whipping her. Sasha cried with pain and
terror, while the gander, waddling and stretching his neck, went up to the
old woman and hissed at her, and when he went back to his flock all the
geese greeted him approvingly with “Ga-ga-ga!” Then Granny proceeded to
whip Motka, and in this Motka’s smock was torn again. Feeling in despair,
and crying loudly, Sasha went to the hut to complain. Motka followed her;
she, too, was crying on a deeper note, without wiping her tears, and her
face was as wet as though it had been dipped in water.


“Holy Saints!” cried Olga, aghast, as the two came into the hut. “Queen of
Heaven!”


Sasha began telling her story, while at the same time Granny walked in
with a storm of shrill cries and abuse; then Fyokla flew into a rage, and
there was an uproar in the hut.


“Never mind, never mind!” Olga, pale and upset, tried to comfort them,
stroking Sasha’s head. “She is your grandmother; it’s a sin to be angry
with her. Never mind, my child.”


Nikolay, who was worn out already by the everlasting hubbub, hunger,
stifling fumes, filth, who hated and despised the poverty, who was ashamed
for his wife and daughter to see his father and mother, swung his legs off
the stove and said in an irritable, tearful voice, addressing his mother:


“You must not beat her! You have no right to beat her!”


“You lie rotting on the stove, you wretched creature!” Fyokla shouted at
him spitefully. “The devil brought you all on us, eating us out of house
and home.”


Sasha and Motka and all the little girls in the hut huddled on the stove
in the corner behind Nikolay’s back, and from that refuge listened in
silent terror, and the beating of their little hearts could be distinctly
heard. Whenever there is someone in a family who has long been ill, and
hopelessly ill, there come painful moments when all timidly, secretly, at
the bottom of their hearts long for his death; and only the children fear
the death of someone near them, and always feel horrified at the thought
of it. And now the children, with bated breath, with a mournful look on
their faces, gazed at Nikolay and thought that he was soon to die; and
they wanted to cry and to say something friendly and compassionate to him.


He pressed close to Olga, as though seeking protection, and said to her
softly in a quavering voice:


“Olya darling, I can’t stay here longer. It’s more than I can bear. For
God’s sake, for Christ’s sake, write to your sister Klavdia Abramovna. Let
her sell and pawn everything she has; let her send us the money. We will
go away from here. Oh, Lord,” he went on miserably, “to have one peep at
Moscow! If I could see it in my dreams, the dear place!”


And when the evening came on, and it was dark in the hut, it was so dismal
that it was hard to utter a word. Granny, very ill-tempered, soaked some
crusts of rye bread in a cup, and was a long time, a whole hour, sucking
at them. Marya, after milking the cow, brought in a pail of milk and set
it on a bench; then Granny poured it from the pail into a jug just as
slowly and deliberately, evidently pleased that it was now the Fast of the
Assumption, so that no one would drink milk and it would be left
untouched. And she only poured out a very little in a saucer for Fyokla’s
baby. When Marya and she carried the jug down to the cellar Motka suddenly
stirred, clambered down from the stove, and going to the bench where stood
the wooden cup full of crusts, sprinkled into it some milk from the
saucer.


Granny, coming back into the hut, sat down to her soaked crusts again,
while Sasha and Motka, sitting on the stove, gazed at her, and they were
glad that she had broken her fast and now would go to hell. They were
comforted and lay down to sleep, and Sasha as she dozed off to sleep
imagined the Day of Judgment: a huge fire was burning, somewhat like a
potter’s kiln, and the Evil One, with horns like a cow’s, and black all
over, was driving Granny into the fire with a long stick, just as Granny
herself had been driving the geese.


V


On the day of the Feast of the Assumption, between ten and eleven in the
evening, the girls and lads who were merrymaking in the meadow suddenly
raised a clamour and outcry, and ran in the direction of the village; and
those who were above on the edge of the ravine could not for the first
moment make out what was the matter.


“Fire! Fire!” they heard desperate shouts from below. “The village is on
fire!”


Those who were sitting above looked round, and a terrible and
extraordinary spectacle met their eyes. On the thatched roof of one of the
end cottages stood a column of flame, seven feet high, which curled round
and scattered sparks in all directions as though it were a fountain. And
all at once the whole roof burst into bright flame, and the crackling of
the fire was audible.


The light of the moon was dimmed, and the whole village was by now bathed
in a red quivering glow: black shadows moved over the ground, there was a
smell of burning, and those who ran up from below were all gasping and
could not speak for trembling; they jostled against each other, fell down,
and they could hardly see in the unaccustomed light, and did not recognize
each other. It was terrible. What seemed particularly dreadful was that
doves were flying over the fire in the smoke; and in the tavern, where
they did not yet know of the fire, they were still singing and playing the
concertina as though there were nothing the matter.


“Uncle Semyon’s on fire,” shouted a loud, coarse voice.


Marya was fussing about round her hut, weeping and wringing her hands,
while her teeth chattered, though the fire was a long way off at the other
end of the village. Nikolay came out in high felt boots, the children ran
out in their little smocks. Near the village constable’s hut an iron sheet
was struck. Boom, boom, boom!... floated through the air, and this
repeated, persistent sound sent a pang to the heart and turned one cold.
The old women stood with the holy ikons. Sheep, calves, cows were driven
out of the back-yards into the street; boxes, sheepskins, tubs were
carried out. A black stallion, who was kept apart from the drove of horses
because he kicked and injured them, on being set free ran once or twice up
and down the village, neighing and pawing the ground; then suddenly
stopped short near a cart and began kicking it with his hind-legs.


They began ringing the bells in the church on the other side of the river.


Near the burning hut it was hot and so light that one could distinctly see
every blade of grass. Semyon, a red-haired peasant with a long nose,
wearing a reefer-jacket and a cap pulled down right over his ears, sat on
one of the boxes which they had succeeded in bringing out: his wife was
lying on her face, moaning and unconscious. A little old man of eighty,
with a big beard, who looked like a gnome—not one of the villagers,
though obviously connected in some way with the fire—walked about
bareheaded, with a white bundle in his arms. The glare was reflected on
his bald head. The village elder, Antip Syedelnikov, as swarthy and
black-haired as a gypsy, went up to the hut with an axe, and hacked out
the windows one after another—no one knew why—then began
chopping up the roof.


“Women, water!” he shouted. “Bring the engine! Look sharp!”


The peasants, who had been drinking in the tavern just before, dragged the
engine up. They were all drunk; they kept stumbling and falling down, and
all had a helpless expression and tears in their eyes.


“Wenches, water!” shouted the elder, who was drunk, too. “Look sharp,
wenches!”


The women and the girls ran downhill to where there was a spring, and kept
hauling pails and buckets of water up the hill, and, pouring it into the
engine, ran down again. Olga and Marya and Sasha and Motka all brought
water. The women and the boys pumped the water; the pipe hissed, and the
elder, directing it now at the door, now at the windows, held back the
stream with his finger, which made it hiss more sharply still.


“Bravo, Antip!” voices shouted approvingly. “Do your best.”


Antip went inside the hut into the fire and shouted from within.


“Pump! Bestir yourselves, good Christian folk, in such a terrible
mischance!”


The peasants stood round in a crowd, doing nothing but staring at the
fire. No one knew what to do, no one had the sense to do anything, though
there were stacks of wheat, hay, barns, and piles of faggots standing all
round. Kiryak and old Osip, his father, both tipsy, were standing there,
too. And as though to justify his doing nothing, old Osip said, addressing
the woman who lay on the ground:


“What is there to trouble about, old girl! The hut is insured—why
are you taking on?”


Semyon, addressing himself first to one person and then to another, kept
describing how the fire had started.


“That old man, the one with the bundle, a house-serf of General
Zhukov’s.... He was cook at our general’s, God rest his soul! He came over
this evening: ‘Let me stay the night,’ says he.... Well, we had a glass,
to be sure.... The wife got the samovar—she was going to give the
old fellow a cup of tea, and in an unlucky hour she set the samovar in the
entrance. The sparks from the chimney must have blown straight up to the
thatch; that’s how it was. We were almost burnt ourselves. And the old
fellow’s cap has been burnt; what a shame!”


And the sheet of iron was struck indefatigably, and the bells kept ringing
in the church the other side of the river. In the glow of the fire, Olga,
breathless, looking with horror at the red sheep and the pink doves flying
in the smoke, kept running down the hill and up again. It seemed to her
that the ringing went to her heart with a sharp stab, that the fire would
never be over, that Sasha was lost.... And when the ceiling of the hut
fell in with a crash, the thought that now the whole village would be
burnt made her weak and faint, and she could not go on fetching water, but
sat down on the ravine, setting the pail down near her; beside her and
below her, the peasant women sat wailing as though at a funeral.


Then the stewards and watchmen from the estate the other side of the river
arrived in two carts, bringing with them a fire-engine. A very young
student in an unbuttoned white tunic rode up on horseback. There was the
thud of axes. They put a ladder to the burning framework of the house, and
five men ran up it at once. Foremost of them all was the student, who was
red in the face and shouting in a harsh hoarse voice, and in a tone as
though putting out fires was a thing he was used to. They pulled the house
to pieces, a beam at a time; they dragged away the corn, the hurdles, and
the stacks that were near.


“Don’t let them break it up!” cried stern voices in the crowd. “Don’t let
them.”


Kiryak made his way up to the hut with a resolute air, as though he meant
to prevent the newcomers from breaking up the hut, but one of the workmen
turned him back with a blow in his neck. There was the sound of laughter,
the workman dealt him another blow, Kiryak fell down, and crawled back
into the crowd on his hands and knees.


Two handsome girls in hats, probably the student’s sisters, came from the
other side of the river. They stood a little way off, looking at the fire.
The beams that had been dragged apart were no longer burning, but were
smoking vigorously; the student, who was working the hose, turned the
water, first on the beams, then on the peasants, then on the women who
were bringing the water.


“George!” the girls called to him reproachfully in anxiety, “George!”


The fire was over. And only when they began to disperse they noticed that
the day was breaking, that everyone was pale and rather dark in the face,
as it always seems in the early morning when the last stars are going out.
As they separated, the peasants laughed and made jokes about General
Zhukov’s cook and his cap which had been burnt; they already wanted to
turn the fire into a joke, and even seemed sorry that it had so soon been
put out.


“How well you extinguished the fire, sir!” said Olga to the student. “You
ought to come to us in Moscow: there we have a fire every day.”


“Why, do you come from Moscow?” asked one of the young ladies.


“Yes, miss. My husband was a waiter at the Slavyansky Bazaar. And this is
my daughter,” she said, indicating Sasha, who was cold and huddling up to
her. “She is a Moscow girl, too.”


The two young ladies said something in French to the student, and he gave
Sasha a twenty-kopeck piece.


Old Father Osip saw this, and there was a gleam of hope in his face.


“We must thank God, your honour, there was no wind,” he said, addressing
the student, “or else we should have been all burnt up together. Your
honour, kind gentlefolks,” he added in embarrassment in a lower tone, “the
morning’s chilly... something to warm one... half a bottle to your
honour’s health.”


Nothing was given him, and clearing his throat he slouched home. Olga
stood afterwards at the end of the street and watched the two carts
crossing the river by the ford and the gentlefolks walking across the
meadow; a carriage was waiting for them the other side of the river. Going
into the hut, she described to her husband with enthusiasm:


“Such good people! And so beautiful! The young ladies were like cherubim.”


“Plague take them!” Fyokla, sleepy, said spitefully.


VI


Marya thought herself unhappy, and said that she would be very glad to
die; Fyokla, on the other hand, found all this life to her taste: the
poverty, the uncleanliness, and the incessant quarrelling. She ate what
was given her without discrimination; slept anywhere, on whatever came to
hand. She would empty the slops just at the porch, would splash them out
from the doorway, and then walk barefoot through the puddle. And from the
very first day she took a dislike to Olga and Nikolay just because they
did not like this life.


“We shall see what you’ll find to eat here, you Moscow gentry!” she said
malignantly. “We shall see!”


One morning, it was at the beginning of September, Fyokla, vigorous,
good-looking, and rosy from the cold, brought up two pails of water; Marya
and Olga were sitting meanwhile at the table drinking tea.


“Tea and sugar,” said Fyokla sarcastically. “The fine ladies!” she added,
setting down the pails. “You have taken to the fashion of tea every day.
You better look out that you don’t burst with your tea-drinking,” she went
on, looking with hatred at Olga. “That’s how you have come by your fat
mug, having a good time in Moscow, you lump of flesh!” She swung the yoke
and hit Olga such a blow on the shoulder that the two sisters-in-law could
only clasp their hands and say:


“Oh, holy Saints!”


Then Fyokla went down to the river to wash the clothes, swearing all the
time so loudly that she could be heard in the hut.


The day passed and was followed by the long autumn evening. They wound
silk in the hut; everyone did it except Fyokla; she had gone over the
river. They got the silk from a factory close by, and the whole family
working together earned next to nothing, twenty kopecks a week.


“Things were better in the old days under the gentry,” said the old father
as he wound silk. “You worked and ate and slept, everything in its turn.
At dinner you had cabbage-soup and boiled grain, and at supper the same
again. Cucumbers and cabbage in plenty: you could eat to your heart’s
content, as much as you wanted. And there was more strictness. Everyone
minded what he was about.”


The hut was lighted by a single little lamp, which burned dimly and
smoked. When someone screened the lamp and a big shadow fell across the
window, the bright moonlight could be seen. Old Osip, speaking slowly,
told them how they used to live before the emancipation; how in those very
parts, where life was now so poor and so dreary, they used to hunt with
harriers, greyhounds, retrievers, and when they went out as beaters the
peasants were given vodka; how whole waggonloads of game used to be sent
to Moscow for the young masters; how the bad were beaten with rods or sent
away to the Tver estate, while the good were rewarded. And Granny told
them something, too. She remembered everything, positively everything. She
described her mistress, a kind, God-fearing woman, whose husband was a
profligate and a rake, and all of whose daughters made unlucky marriages:
one married a drunkard, another married a workman, the other eloped
secretly (Granny herself, at that time a young girl, helped in the
elopement), and they had all three as well as their mother died early from
grief. And remembering all this, Granny positively began to shed tears.


All at once someone knocked at the door, and they all started.


“Uncle Osip, give me a night’s lodging.”


The little bald old man, General Zhukov’s cook, the one whose cap had been
burnt, walked in. He sat down and listened, then he, too, began telling
stories of all sorts. Nikolay, sitting on the stove with his legs hanging
down, listened and asked questions about the dishes that were prepared in
the old days for the gentry. They talked of rissoles, cutlets, various
soups and sauces, and the cook, who remembered everything very well,
mentioned dishes that are no longer served. There was one, for instance—a
dish made of bulls’ eyes, which was called “waking up in the morning.”


“And used you to do cutlets a la marechal?” asked Nikolay.


“No.”


Nikolay shook his head reproachfully and said:


“Tut, tut! You were not much of a cook!”


The little girls sitting and lying on the stove stared down without
bJlinking; it seemed as though there were a great many of them, like
cherubim in the clouds. They liked the stories: they were breathless; they
shuddered and turned pale with alternate rapture and terror, and they
listened breathlessly, afraid to stir, to Granny, whose stories were the
most interesting of all.


They lay down to sleep in silence; and the old people, troubled and
excited by their reminiscences, thought how precious was youth, of which,
whatever it might have been like, nothing was left in the memory but what
was living, joyful, touching, and how terribly cold was death, which was
not far off, better not think of it! The lamp died down. And the dusk, and
the two little windows sharply defined by the moonlight, and the stillness
and the creak of the cradle, reminded them for some reason that life was
over, that nothing one could do would bring it back.... You doze off, you
forget yourself, and suddenly someone touches your shoulder or breathes on
your cheek—and sleep is gone; your body feels cramped, and thoughts
of death keep creeping into your mind. You turn on the other side: death
is forgotten, but old dreary, sickening thoughts of poverty, of food, of
how dear flour is getting, stray through the mind, and a little later
again you remember that life is over and you cannot bring it back....


“Oh, Lord!” sighed the cook.


Someone gave a soft, soft tap at the window. It must be Fyokla come back.
Olga got up, and yawning and whispering a prayer, opened the door, then
drew the bolt in the outer room, but no one came in; only from the street
came a cold draught and a sudden brightness from the moonlight. The
street, still and deserted, and the moon itself floating across the sky,
could be seen at the open door.


“Who is there?” called Olga.


“I,” she heard the answer—“it is I.”


Near the door, crouching against the wall, stood Fyokla, absolutely naked.
She was shivering with cold, her teeth were chattering, and in the bright
moonlight she looked very pale, strange, and beautiful. The shadows on
her, and the bright moonlight on her skin, stood out vividly, and her dark
eyebrows and firm, youthful bosom were defined with peculiar distinctness.


“The ruffians over there undressed me and turned me out like this,” she
said. “I’ve come home without my clothes... naked as my mother bore me.
Bring me something to put on.”


“But go inside!” Olga said softly, beginning to shiver, too.


“I don’t want the old folks to see.” Granny was, in fact, already stirring
and muttering, and the old father asked: “Who is there?” Olga brought her
own smock and skirt, dressed Fyokla, and then both went softly into the
inner room, trying not to make a noise with the door.


“Is that you, you sleek one?” Granny grumbled angrily, guessing who it
was. “Fie upon you, nightwalker!... Bad luck to you!”


“It’s all right, it’s all right,” whispered Olga, wrapping Fyokla up;
“it’s all right, dearie.”


All was stillness again. They always slept badly; everyone was kept awake
by something worrying and persistent: the old man by the pain in his back,
Granny by anxiety and anger, Marya by terror, the children by itch and
hunger. Now, too, their sleep was troubled; they kept turning over from
one side to the other, talking in their sleep, getting up for a drink.


Fyokla suddenly broke into a loud, coarse howl, but immediately checked
herself, and only uttered sobs from time to time, growing softer and on a
lower note, until she relapsed into silence. From time to time from the
other side of the river there floated the sound of the beating of the
hours; but the time seemed somehow strange—five was struck and then
three.


“Oh Lord!” sighed the cook.


Looking at the windows, it was difficult to tell whether it was still
moonlight or whether the dawn had begun. Marya got up and went out, and
she could be heard milking the cows and saying, “Stea-dy!” Granny went
out, too. It was still dark in the hut, but all the objects in it could be
discerned.


Nikolay, who had not slept all night, got down from the stove. He took his
dress-coat out of a green box, put it on, and going to the window, stroked
the sleeves and took hold of the coat-tails—and smiled. Then he
carefully took off the coat, put it away in his box, and lay down again.


Marya came in again and began lighting the stove. She was evidently hardly
awake, and seemed dropping asleep as she walked. Probably she had had some
dream, or the stories of the night before came into her mind as,
stretching luxuriously before the stove, she said:


“No, freedom is better.”


VII


The master arrived—that was what they called the police inspector.
When he would come and what he was coming for had been known for the last
week. There were only forty households in Zhukovo, but more than two
thousand roubles of arrears of rates and taxes had accumulated.


The police inspector stopped at the tavern. He drank there two glasses of
tea, and then went on foot to the village elder’s hut, near which a crowd
of those who were in debt stood waiting. The elder, Antip Syedelnikov,
was, in spite of his youth—he was only a little over thirty—strict
and always on the side of the authorities, though he himself was poor and
did not pay his taxes regularly. Evidently he enjoyed being elder, and
liked the sense of authority, which he could only display by strictness.
In the village council the peasants were afraid of him and obeyed him. It
would sometimes happen that he would pounce on a drunken man in the street
or near the tavern, tie his hands behind him, and put him in the lock-up.
On one occasion he even put Granny in the lock-up because she went to the
village council instead of Osip, and began swearing, and he kept her there
for a whole day and night. He had never lived in a town or read a book,
but somewhere or other had picked up various learned expressions, and
loved to make use of them in conversation, and he was respected for this
though he was not always understood.


When Osip came into the village elder’s hut with his tax book, the police
inspector, a lean old man with a long grey beard, in a grey tunic, was
sitting at a table in the passage, writing something. It was clean in the
hut; all the walls were dotted with pictures cut out of the illustrated
papers, and in the most conspicuous place near the ikon there was a
portrait of the Battenburg who was the Prince of Bulgaria. By the table
stood Antip Syedelnikov with his arms folded.


“There is one hundred and nineteen roubles standing against him,” he said
when it came to Osip’s turn. “Before Easter he paid a rouble, and he has
not paid a kopeck since.”


The police inspector raised his eyes to Osip and asked:


“Why is this, brother?”


“Show Divine mercy, your honour,” Osip began, growing agitated. “Allow me
to say last year the gentleman at Lutorydsky said to me, ‘Osip,’ he said,
‘sell your hay... you sell it,’ he said. Well, I had a hundred poods for
sale; the women mowed it on the water-meadow. Well, we struck a bargain
all right, willingly....”


He complained of the elder, and kept turning round to the peasants as
though inviting them to bear witness; his face flushed red and perspired,
and his eyes grew sharp and angry.


“I don’t know why you are saying all this,” said the police inspector. “I
am asking you... I am asking you why you don’t pay your arrears. You don’t
pay, any of you, and am I to be responsible for you?”


“I can’t do it.”


“His words have no sequel, your honour,” said the elder. “The
Tchikildyeevs certainly are of a defective class, but if you will just ask
the others, the root of it all is vodka, and they are a very bad lot. With
no sort of understanding.”


The police inspector wrote something down, and said to Osip quietly, in an
even tone, as though he were asking him for water:


“Be off.”


Soon he went away; and when he got into his cheap chaise and cleared his
throat, it could be seen from the very expression of his long thin back
that he was no longer thinking of Osip or of the village elder, nor of the
Zhukovo arrears, but was thinking of his own affairs. Before he had gone
three-quarters of a mile Antip was already carrying off the samovar from
the Tchikildyeevs’ cottage, followed by Granny, screaming shrilly and
straining her throat:


“I won’t let you have it, I won’t let you have it, damn you!”


He walked rapidly with long steps, and she pursued him panting, almost
falling over, a bent, ferocious figure; her kerchief slipped on to her
shoulders, her grey hair with greenish lights on it was blown about in the
wind. She suddenly stopped short, and like a genuine rebel, fell to
beating her breast with her fists and shouting louder than ever in a
sing-song voice, as though she were sobbing:


“Good Christians and believers in God! Neighbours, they have ill-treated
me! Kind friends, they have oppressed me! Oh, oh! dear people, take my
part.”


“Granny, Granny!” said the village elder sternly, “have some sense in your
head!”


It was hopelessly dreary in the Tchikildyeevs’ hut without the samovar;
there was something humiliating in this loss, insulting, as though the
honour of the hut had been outraged. Better if the elder had carried off
the table, all the benches, all the pots—it would not have seemed so
empty. Granny screamed, Marya cried, and the little girls, looking at her,
cried, too. The old father, feeling guilty, sat in the corner with bowed
head and said nothing. And Nikolay, too, was silent. Granny loved him and
was sorry for him, but now, forgetting her pity, she fell upon him with
abuse, with reproaches, shaking her fist right in his face. She shouted
that it was all his fault; why had he sent them so little when he boasted
in his letters that he was getting fifty roubles a month at the Slavyansky
Bazaar? Why had he come, and with his family, too? If he died, where was
the money to come from for his funeral...? And it was pitiful to look at
Nikolay, Olga, and Sasha.


The old father cleared his throat, took his cap, and went off to the
village elder. Antip was soldering something by the stove, puffing out his
cheeks; there was a smell of burning. His children, emaciated and
unwashed, no better than the Tchikildyeevs, were scrambling about the
floor; his wife, an ugly, freckled woman with a prominent stomach, was
winding silk. They were a poor, unlucky family, and Antip was the only one
who looked vigorous and handsome. On a bench there were five samovars
standing in a row. The old man said his prayer to Battenburg and said:


“Antip, show the Divine mercy. Give me back the samovar, for Christ’s
sake!”


“Bring three roubles, then you shall have it.”


“I can’t do it!”


Antip puffed out his cheeks, the fire roared and hissed, and the glow was
reflected in the samovar. The old man crumpled up his cap and said after a
moment’s thought:


“You give it me back.”


The swarthy elder looked quite black, and was like a magician; he turned
round to Osip and said sternly and rapidly:


“It all depends on the rural captain. On the twenty-sixth instant you can
state the grounds for your dissatisfaction before the administrative
session, verbally or in writing.”


Osip did not understand a word, but he was satisfied with that and went
home.


Ten days later the police inspector came again, stayed an hour and went
away. During those days the weather had changed to cold and windy; the
river had been frozen for some time past, but still there was no snow, and
people found it difficult to get about. On the eve of a holiday some of
the neighbours came in to Osip’s to sit and have a talk. They did not
light the lamp, as it would have been a sin to work, but talked in the
darkness. There were some items of news, all rather unpleasant. In two or
three households hens had been taken for the arrears, and had been sent to
the district police station, and there they had died because no one had
fed them; they had taken sheep, and while they were being driven away tied
to one another, shifted into another cart at each village, one of them had
died. And now they were discussing the question, who was to blame?


“The Zemstvo,” said Osip. “Who else?”


“Of course it is the Zemstvo.”


The Zemstvo was blamed for everything—for the arrears, and for the
oppressions, and for the failure of the crops, though no one of them knew
what was meant by the Zemstvo. And this dated from the time when
well-to-do peasants who had factories, shops, and inns of their own were
members of the Zemstvos, were dissatisfied with them, and took to swearing
at the Zemstvos in their factories and inns.


They talked of God’s not sending the snow; they had to bring in wood for
fuel, and there was no driving nor walking in the frozen ruts. In old days
fifteen to twenty years ago conversation was much more interesting in
Zhukovo. In those days every old man looked as though he were treasuring
some secret; as though he knew something and was expecting something. They
used to talk about an edict in golden letters, about the division of
lands, about new land, about treasures; they hinted at something. Now the
people of Zhukovo had no mystery at all; their whole life was bare and
open in the sight of all, and they could talk of nothing but poverty,
food, there being no snow yet....


There was a pause. Then they thought again of the hens, of the sheep, and
began discussing whose fault it was.


“The Zemstvo,” said Osip wearily. “Who else?”


VIII


The parish church was nearly five miles away at Kosogorovo, and the
peasants only attended it when they had to do so for baptisms, weddings,
or funerals; they went to the services at the church across the river. On
holidays in fine weather the girls dressed up in their best and went in a
crowd together to church, and it was a cheering sight to see them in their
red, yellow, and green dresses cross the meadow; in bad weather they all
stayed at home. They went for the sacrament to the parish church. From
each of those who did not manage in Lent to go to confession in readiness
for the sacrament the parish priest, going the round of the huts with the
cross at Easter, took fifteen kopecks.


The old father did not believe in God, for he hardly ever thought about
Him; he recognized the supernatural, but considered it was entirely the
women’s concern, and when religion or miracles were discussed before him,
or a question were put to him, he would say reluctantly, scratching
himself:


“Who can tell!”


Granny believed, but her faith was somewhat hazy; everything was mixed up
in her memory, and she could scarcely begin to think of sins, of death, of
the salvation of the soul, before poverty and her daily cares took
possession of her mind, and she instantly forgot what she was thinking
about. She did not remember the prayers, and usually in the evenings,
before lying down to sleep, she would stand before the ikons and whisper:


“Holy Mother of Kazan, Holy Mother of Smolensk, Holy Mother of
Troerutchitsy...”


Marya and Fyokla crossed themselves, fasted, and took the sacrament every
year, but understood nothing. The children were not taught their prayers,
nothing was told them about God, and no moral principles were instilled
into them; they were only forbidden to eat meat or milk in Lent. In the
other families it was much the same: there were few who believed, few who
understood. At the same time everyone loved the Holy Scripture, loved it
with a tender, reverent love; but they had no Bible, there was no one to
read it and explain it, and because Olga sometimes read them the gospel,
they respected her, and they all addressed her and Sasha as though they
were superior to themselves.


For church holidays and services Olga often went to neighbouring villages,
and to the district town, in which there were two monasteries and
twenty-seven churches. She was dreamy, and when she was on these
pilgrimages she quite forgot her family, and only when she got home again
suddenly made the joyful discovery that she had a husband and daughter,
and then would say, smiling and radiant:


“God has sent me blessings!”


What went on in the village worried her and seemed to her revolting. On
Elijah’s Day they drank, at the Assumption they drank, at the Ascension
they drank. The Feast of the Intercession was the parish holiday for
Zhukovo, and the peasants used to drink then for three days; they
squandered on drink fifty roubles of money belonging to the Mir, and then
collected more for vodka from all the households. On the first day of the
feast the Tchikildyeevs killed a sheep and ate of it in the morning, at
dinner-time, and in the evening; they ate it ravenously, and the children
got up at night to eat more. Kiryak was fearfully drunk for three whole
days; he drank up everything, even his boots and cap, and beat Marya so
terribly that they had to pour water over her. And then they were all
ashamed and sick.


However, even in Zhukovo, in this “Slaveytown,” there was once an outburst
of genuine religious enthusiasm. It was in August, when throughout the
district they carried from village to village the Holy Mother, the giver
of life. It was still and overcast on the day when they expected Her
at Zhukovo. The girls set off in the morning to meet the ikon, in their
bright holiday dresses, and brought Her towards the evening, in procession
with the cross and with singing, while the bells pealed in the church
across the river. An immense crowd of villagers and strangers flooded the
street; there was noise, dust, a great crush.... And the old father and
Granny and Kiryak—all stretched out their hands to the ikon, looked
eagerly at it and said, weeping:


“Defender! Mother! Defender!”


All seemed suddenly to realize that there was not an empty void between
earth and heaven, that the rich and the powerful had not taken possession
of everything, that there was still a refuge from injury, from slavish
bondage, from crushing, unendurable poverty, from the terrible vodka.


“Defender! Mother!” sobbed Marya. “Mother!”


But the thanksgiving service ended and the ikon was carried away, and
everything went on as before; and again there was a sound of coarse
drunken oaths from the tavern.


Only the well-to-do peasants were afraid of death; the richer they were
the less they believed in God, and in the salvation of souls, and only
through fear of the end of the world put up candles and had services said
for them, to be on the safe side. The peasants who were rather poorer were
not afraid of death. The old father and Granny were told to their faces
that they had lived too long, that it was time they were dead, and they
did not mind. They did not hinder Fyokla from saying in Nikolay’s presence
that when Nikolay died her husband Denis would get exemption—to
return home from the army. And Marya, far from fearing death, regretted
that it was so slow in coming, and was glad when her children died.


Death they did not fear, but of every disease they had an exaggerated
terror. The merest trifle was enough—a stomach upset, a slight
chill, and Granny would be wrapped up on the stove, and would begin
moaning loudly and incessantly:


“I am dy-ing!”


The old father hurried off for the priest, and Granny received the
sacrament and extreme unction. They often talked of colds, of worms, of
tumours which move in the stomach and coil round to the heart. Above all,
they were afraid of catching cold, and so put on thick clothes even in the
summer and warmed themselves at the stove. Granny was fond of being
doctored, and often went to the hospital, where she used to say she was
not seventy, but fifty-eight; she supposed that if the doctor knew her
real age he would not treat her, but would say it was time she died
instead of taking medicine. She usually went to the hospital early in the
morning, taking with her two or three of the little girls, and came back
in the evening, hungry and ill-tempered—with drops for herself and
ointments for the little girls. Once she took Nikolay, who swallowed drops
for a fortnight afterwards, and said he felt better.


Granny knew all the doctors and their assistants and the wise men for
twenty miles round, and not one of them she liked. At the Intercession,
when the priest made the round of the huts with the cross, the deacon told
her that in the town near the prison lived an old man who had been a
medical orderly in the army, and who made wonderful cures, and advised her
to try him. Granny took his advice. When the first snow fell she drove to
the town and fetched an old man with a big beard, a converted Jew, in a
long gown, whose face was covered with blue veins. There were outsiders at
work in the hut at the time: an old tailor, in terrible spectacles, was
cutting a waistcoat out of some rags, and two young men were making felt
boots out of wool; Kiryak, who had been dismissed from his place for
drunkenness, and now lived at home, was sitting beside the tailor mending
a bridle. And it was crowded, stifling, and noisome in the hut. The
converted Jew examined Nikolay and said that it was necessary to try
cupping.


He put on the cups, and the old tailor, Kiryak, and the little girls stood
round and looked on, and it seemed to them that they saw the disease being
drawn out of Nikolay; and Nikolay, too, watched how the cups suckling at
his breast gradually filled with dark blood, and felt as though there
really were something coming out of him, and smiled with pleasure.


“It’s a good thing,” said the tailor. “Please God, it will do you good.”


The Jew put on twelve cups and then another twelve, drank some tea, and
went away. Nikolay began shivering; his face looked drawn, and, as the
women expressed it, shrank up like a fist; his fingers turned blue. He
wrapped himself up in a quilt and in a sheepskin, but got colder and
colder. Towards the evening he began to be in great distress; asked to be
laid on the ground, asked the tailor not to smoke; then he subsided under
the sheepskin and towards morning he died.


IX


Oh, what a grim, what a long winter!


Their own grain did not last beyond Christmas, and they had to buy flour.
Kiryak, who lived at home now, was noisy in the evenings, inspiring terror
in everyone, and in the mornings he suffered from headache and was
ashamed; and he was a pitiful sight. In the stall the starved cows
bellowed day and night—a heart-rending sound to Granny and Marya.
And as ill-luck would have it, there was a sharp frost all the winter, the
snow drifted in high heaps, and the winter dragged on. At Annunciation
there was a regular blizzard, and there was a fall of snow at Easter.


But in spite of it all the winter did end. At the beginning of April there
came warm days and frosty nights. Winter would not give way, but one warm
day overpowered it at last, and the streams began to flow and the birds
began to sing. The whole meadow and the bushes near the river were drowned
in the spring floods, and all the space between Zhukovo and the further
side was filled up with a vast sheet of water, from which wild ducks rose
up in flocks here and there. The spring sunset, flaming among gorgeous
clouds, gave every evening something new, extraordinary, incredible—just
what one does not believe in afterwards, when one sees those very colours
and those very clouds in a picture.


The cranes flew swiftly, swiftly, with mournful cries, as though they were
calling themselves. Standing on the edge of the ravine, Olga looked a long
time at the flooded meadow, at the sunshine, at the bright church, that
looked as though it had grown younger; and her tears flowed and her breath
came in gasps from her passionate longing to go away, to go far away to
the end of the world. It was already settled that she should go back to
Moscow to be a servant, and that Kiryak should set off with her to get a
job as a porter or something. Oh, to get away quickly!


As soon as it dried up and grew warm they got ready to set off. Olga and
Sasha, with wallets on their backs and shoes of plaited bark on their
feet, came out before daybreak: Marya came out, too, to see them on their
way. Kiryak was not well, and was kept at home for another week. For the
last time Olga prayed at the church and thought of her husband, and though
she did not shed tears, her face puckered up and looked ugly like an old
woman’s. During the winter she had grown thinner and plainer, and her hair
had gone a little grey, and instead of the old look of sweetness and the
pleasant smile on her face, she had the resigned, mournful expression left
by the sorrows she had been through, and there was something blank and
irresponsive in her eyes, as though she did not hear what was said. She
was sorry to part from the village and the peasants. She remembered how
they had carried out Nikolay, and how a requiem had been ordered for him
at almost every hut, and all had shed tears in sympathy with her grief. In
the course of the summer and the winter there had been hours and days when
it seemed as though these people lived worse than the beasts, and to live
with them was terrible; they were coarse, dishonest, filthy, and drunken;
they did not live in harmony, but quarrelled continually, because they
distrusted and feared and did not respect one another. Who keeps the
tavern and makes the people drunken? A peasant. Who wastes and spends on
drink the funds of the commune, of the schools, of the church? A peasant.
Who stole from his neighbours, set fire to their property, gave false
witness at the court for a bottle of vodka? At the meetings of the Zemstvo
and other local bodies, who was the first to fall foul of the peasants? A
peasant. Yes, to live with them was terrible; but yet, they were human
beings, they suffered and wept like human beings, and there was nothing in
their lives for which one could not find excuse. Hard labour that made the
whole body ache at night, the cruel winters, the scanty harvests, the
overcrowding; and they had no help and none to whom they could look for
help. Those of them who were a little stronger and better off could be no
help, as they were themselves coarse, dishonest, drunken, and abused one
another just as revoltingly; the paltriest little clerk or official
treated the peasants as though they were tramps, and addressed even the
village elders and church wardens as inferiors, and considered they had a
right to do so. And, indeed, can any sort of help or good example be given
by mercenary, greedy, depraved, and idle persons who only visit the
village in order to insult, to despoil, and to terrorize? Olga remembered
the pitiful, humiliated look of the old people when in the winter Kiryak
had been taken to be flogged.... And now she felt sorry for all these
people, painfully so, and as she walked on she kept looking back at the
huts.


After walking two miles with them Marya said good-bye, then kneeling, and
falling forward with her face on the earth, she began wailing:


“Again I am left alone. Alas, for poor me! poor, unhappy!...”


And she wailed like this for a long time, and for a long way Olga and
Sasha could still see her on her knees, bowing down to someone at the side
and clutching her head in her hands, while the rooks flew over her head.


The sun rose high; it began to get hot. Zhukovo was left far behind.
Walking was pleasant. Olga and Sasha soon forgot both the village and
Marya; they were gay and everything entertained them. Now they came upon
an ancient barrow, now upon a row of telegraph posts running one after
another into the distance and disappearing into the horizon, and the wires
hummed mysteriously. Then they saw a homestead, all wreathed in green
foliage; there came a scent from it of dampness, of hemp, and it seemed
for some reason that happy people lived there. Then they came upon a
horse’s skeleton whitening in solitude in the open fields. And the larks
trilled unceasingly, the corncrakes called to one another, and the
landrail cried as though someone were really scraping at an old iron rail.


At midday Olga and Sasha reached a big village. There in the broad street
they met the little old man who was General Zhukov’s cook. He was hot, and
his red, perspiring bald head shone in the sunshine. Olga and he did not
recognize each other, then looked round at the same moment, recognized
each other, and went their separate ways without saying a word. Stopping
near the hut which looked newest and most prosperous, Olga bowed down
before the open windows, and said in a loud, thin, chanting voice:


“Good Christian folk, give alms, for Christ’s sake, that God’s blessing
may be upon you, and that your parents may be in the Kingdom of Heaven in
peace eternal.”


“Good Christian folk,” Sasha began chanting, “give, for Christ’s sake,
that God’s blessing, the Heavenly Kingdom...”


 

The Chorus Girl and Other Stories

 


      THE CHORUS GIRL
    

      ONE day when she was younger and better-looking, and when her voice was
      stronger, Nikolay Petrovitch Kolpakov, her adorer, was sitting in the
      outer room in her summer villa. It was intolerably hot and stifling.
      Kolpakov, who had just dined and drunk a whole bottle of inferior port,
      felt ill-humoured and out of sorts. Both were bored and waiting for the
      heat of the day to be over in order to go for a walk.
    

      All at once there was a sudden ring at the door. Kolpakov, who was sitting
      with his coat off, in his slippers, jumped up and looked inquiringly at
      Pasha.
    

      "It must be the postman or one of the girls," said the singer.
    

      Kolpakov did not mind being found by the postman or Pasha's lady friends,
      but by way of precaution gathered up his clothes and went into the next
      room, while Pasha ran to open the door. To her great surprise in the
      doorway stood, not the postman and not a girl friend, but an unknown
      woman, young and beautiful, who was dressed like a lady, and from all
      outward signs was one.
    

      The stranger was pale and was breathing heavily as though she had been
      running up a steep flight of stairs.
    

      "What is it?" asked Pasha.
    

      The lady did not at once answer. She took a step forward, slowly looked
      about the room, and sat down in a way that suggested that from fatigue, or
      perhaps illness, she could not stand; then for a long time her pale lips
      quivered as she tried in vain to speak.
    

      "Is my husband here?" she asked at last, raising to Pasha her big eyes
      with their red tear-stained lids.
    

      "Husband?" whispered Pasha, and was suddenly so frightened that her hands
      and feet turned cold. "What husband?" she repeated, beginning to tremble.
    

      "My husband, . . . Nikolay Petrovitch Kolpakov."
    

      "N . . . no, madam. . . . I . . . I don't know any husband."
    

      A minute passed in silence. The stranger several times passed her
      handkerchief over her pale lips and held her breath to stop her inward
      trembling, while Pasha stood before her motionless, like a post, and
      looked at her with astonishment and terror.
    

      "So you say he is not here?" the lady asked, this time speaking with a
      firm voice and smiling oddly.
    

      "I . . . I don't know who it is you are asking about."
    

      "You are horrid, mean, vile . . ." the stranger muttered, scanning Pasha
      with hatred and repulsion. "Yes, yes . . . you are horrid. I am very, very
      glad that at last I can tell you so!"
    

      Pasha felt that on this lady in black with the angry eyes and white
      slender fingers she produced the impression of something horrid and
      unseemly, and she felt ashamed of her chubby red cheeks, the pock-mark on
      her nose, and the fringe on her forehead, which never could be combed
      back. And it seemed to her that if she had been thin, and had had no
      powder on her face and no fringe on her forehead, then she could have
      disguised the fact that she was not "respectable," and she would not have
      felt so frightened and ashamed to stand facing this unknown, mysterious
      lady.
    

      "Where is my husband?" the lady went on. "Though I don't care whether he
      is here or not, but I ought to tell you that the money has been missed,
      and they are looking for Nikolay Petrovitch. . . . They mean to arrest
      him. That's your doing!"
    

      The lady got up and walked about the room in great excitement. Pasha
      looked at her and was so frightened that she could not understand.
    

      "He'll be found and arrested to-day," said the lady, and she gave a sob,
      and in that sound could be heard her resentment and vexation. "I know who
      has brought him to this awful position! Low, horrid creature! Loathsome,
      mercenary hussy!" The lady's lips worked and her nose wrinkled up with
      disgust. "I am helpless, do you hear, you low woman? . . . I am helpless;
      you are stronger than I am, but there is One to defend me and my children!
      God sees all! He is just! He will punish you for every tear I have shed,
      for all my sleepless nights! The time will come; you will think of me! . .
      ."
    

      Silence followed again. The lady walked about the room and wrung her
      hands, while Pasha still gazed blankly at her in amazement, not
      understanding and expecting something terrible.
    

      "I know nothing about it, madam," she said, and suddenly burst into tears.
    

      "You are lying!" cried the lady, and her eyes flashed angrily at her. "I
      know all about it! I've known you a long time. I know that for the last
      month he has been spending every day with you!"
    

      "Yes. What then? What of it? I have a great many visitors, but I don't
      force anyone to come. He is free to do as he likes."
    

      "I tell you they have discovered that money is missing! He has embezzled
      money at the office! For the sake of such a . . . creature as you, for
      your sake he has actually committed a crime. Listen," said the lady in a
      resolute voice, stopping short, facing Pasha. "You can have no principles;
      you live simply to do harm-that's your object; but one can't imagine you
      have fallen so low that you have no trace of human feeling left! He has a
      wife, children. . . . If he is condemned and sent into exile we shall
      starve, the children and I. . . . Understand that! And yet there is a
      chance of saving him and us from destitution and disgrace. If I take them
      nine hundred roubles to-day they will let him alone. Only nine hundred
      roubles!"
    

      "What nine hundred roubles?" Pasha asked softly. "I . . . I don't know. .
      . . I haven't taken it."
    

      "I am not asking you for nine hundred roubles. . . . You have no money,
      and I don't want your money. I ask you for something else. . . . Men
      usually give expensive things to women like you. Only give me back the
      things my husband has given you!"
    

      "Madam, he has never made me a present of anything!" Pasha wailed,
      beginning to understand.
    

      "Where is the money? He has squandered his own and mine and other
      people's. . . . What has become of it all? Listen, I beg you! I was
      carried away by indignation and have said a lot of nasty things to you,
      but I apologize. You must hate me, I know, but if you are capable of
      sympathy, put yourself in my position! I implore you to give me back the
      things!"
    

      "H'm!" said Pasha, and she shrugged her shoulders. "I would with pleasure,
      but God is my witness, he never made me a present of anything. Believe me,
      on my conscience. However, you are right, though," said the singer in
      confusion, "he did bring me two little things. Certainly I will give them
      back, if you wish it."
    

      Pasha pulled out one of the drawers in the toilet-table and took out of it
      a hollow gold bracelet and a thin ring with a ruby in it.
    

      "Here, madam!" she said, handing the visitor these articles.
    

      The lady flushed and her face quivered. She was offended.
    

      "What are you giving me?" she said. "I am not asking for charity, but for
      what does not belong to you . . . what you have taken advantage of your
      position to squeeze out of my husband . . . that weak, unhappy man. . . .
      On Thursday, when I saw you with my husband at the harbour you were
      wearing expensive brooches and bracelets. So it's no use your playing the
      innocent lamb to me! I ask you for the last time: will you give me the
      things, or not?"
    

      "You are a queer one, upon my word," said Pasha, beginning to feel
      offended. "I assure you that, except the bracelet and this little ring,
      I've never seen a thing from your Nikolay Petrovitch. He brings me nothing
      but sweet cakes."
    

      "Sweet cakes!" laughed the stranger. "At home the children have nothing to
      eat, and here you have sweet cakes. You absolutely refuse to restore the
      presents?"
    

      Receiving no answer, the lady sat down and stared into space, pondering.
    

      "What's to be done now?" she said. "If I don't get nine hundred roubles,
      he is ruined, and the children and I am ruined, too. Shall I kill this low
      woman or go down on my knees to her?"
    

      The lady pressed her handkerchief to her face and broke into sobs.
    

      "I beg you!" Pasha heard through the stranger's sobs. "You see you have
      plundered and ruined my husband. Save him. . . . You have no feeling for
      him, but the children . . . the children . . . What have the children
      done?"
    

      Pasha imagined little children standing in the street, crying with hunger,
      and she, too, sobbed.
    

      "What can I do, madam?" she said. "You say that I am a low woman and that
      I have ruined Nikolay Petrovitch, and I assure you . . . before God
      Almighty, I have had nothing from him whatever. . . . There is only one
      girl in our chorus who has a rich admirer; all the rest of us live from
      hand to mouth on bread and kvass. Nikolay Petrovitch is a highly educated,
      refined gentleman, so I've made him welcome. We are bound to make
      gentlemen welcome."
    

      "I ask you for the things! Give me the things! I am crying. . . . I am
      humiliating myself. . . . If you like I will go down on my knees! If you
      wish it!"
    

      Pasha shrieked with horror and waved her hands. She felt that this pale,
      beautiful lady who expressed herself so grandly, as though she were on the
      stage, really might go down on her knees to her, simply from pride, from
      grandeur, to exalt herself and humiliate the chorus girl.
    

      "Very well, I will give you things!" said Pasha, wiping her eyes and
      bustling about. "By all means. Only they are not from Nikolay Petrovitch.
      . . . I got these from other gentlemen. As you please. . . ."
    

      Pasha pulled out the upper drawer of the chest, took out a diamond brooch,
      a coral necklace, some rings and bracelets, and gave them all to the lady.
    

      "Take them if you like, only I've never had anything from your husband.
      Take them and grow rich," Pasha went on, offended at the threat to go down
      on her knees. "And if you are a lady . . . his lawful wife, you should
      keep him to yourself. I should think so! I did not ask him to come; he
      came of himself."
    

      Through her tears the lady scrutinized the articles given her and said:
    

      "This isn't everything. . . . There won't be five hundred roubles' worth
      here."
    

      Pasha impulsively flung out of the chest a gold watch, a cigar-case and
      studs, and said, flinging up her hands:
    

      "I've nothing else left. . . . You can search!"
    

      The visitor gave a sigh, with trembling hands twisted the things up in her
      handkerchief, and went out without uttering a word, without even nodding
      her head.
    

      The door from the next room opened and Kolpakov walked in. He was pale and
      kept shaking his head nervously, as though he had swallowed something very
      bitter; tears were glistening in his eyes.
    

      "What presents did you make me?" Pasha asked, pouncing upon him. "When did
      you, allow me to ask you?"
    

      "Presents . . . that's no matter!" said Kolpakov, and he tossed his head.
      "My God! She cried before you, she humbled herself. . . ."
    

      "I am asking you, what presents did you make me?" Pasha cried.
    

      "My God! She, a lady, so proud, so pure. . . . She was ready to go down on
      her knees to . . . to this wench! And I've brought her to this! I've
      allowed it!"
    

      He clutched his head in his hands and moaned.
    

      "No, I shall never forgive myself for this! I shall never forgive myself!
      Get away from me . . . you low creature!" he cried with repulsion, backing
      away from Pasha, and thrusting her off with trembling hands. "She would
      have gone down on her knees, and . . . and to you! Oh, my God!"
    

      He rapidly dressed, and pushing Pasha aside contemptuously, made for the
      door and went out.
    

      Pasha lay down and began wailing aloud. She was already regretting her
      things which she had given away so impulsively, and her feelings were
      hurt. She remembered how three years ago a merchant had beaten her for no
      sort of reason, and she wailed more loudly than ever.
    

      VEROTCHKA
    

      IVAN ALEXEYITCH OGNEV remembers how on that August evening he opened the
      glass door with a rattle and went out on to the verandah. He was wearing a
      light Inverness cape and a wide-brimmed straw hat, the very one that was
      lying with his top-boots in the dust under his bed. In one hand he had a
      big bundle of books and notebooks, in the other a thick knotted stick.
    

      Behind the door, holding the lamp to show the way, stood the master of the
      house, Kuznetsov, a bald old man with a long grey beard, in a snow-white
      piquÃ© jacket. The old man was smiling cordially and nodding his head.
    

      "Good-bye, old fellow!" said Ognev.
    

      Kuznetsov put the lamp on a little table and went out to the verandah. Two
      long narrow shadows moved down the steps towards the flower-beds, swayed
      to and fro, and leaned their heads on the trunks of the lime-trees.
    

      "Good-bye and once more thank you, my dear fellow!" said Ivan Alexeyitch.
      "Thank you for your welcome, for your kindness, for your affection. . . .
      I shall never forget your hospitality as long as I live. You are so good,
      and your daughter is so good, and everyone here is so kind, so
      good-humoured and friendly . . . Such a splendid set of people that I
      don't know how to say what I feel!"
    

      From excess of feeling and under the influence of the home-made wine he
      had just drunk, Ognev talked in a singing voice like a divinity student,
      and was so touched that he expressed his feelings not so much by words as
      by the blinking of his eyes and the twitching of his shoulders. Kuznetsov,
      who had also drunk a good deal and was touched, craned forward to the
      young man and kissed him.
    

      "I've grown as fond of you as if I were your dog," Ognev went on. "I've
      been turning up here almost every day; I've stayed the night a dozen
      times. It's dreadful to think of all the home-made wine I've drunk. And
      thank you most of all for your co-operation and help. Without you I should
      have been busy here over my statistics till October. I shall put in my
      preface: 'I think it my duty to express my gratitude to the President of
      the District Zemstvo of N--, Kuznetsov, for his kind co-operation.' There
      is a brilliant future before statistics! My humble respects to Vera
      Gavrilovna, and tell the doctors, both the lawyers and your secretary,
      that I shall never forget their help! And now, old fellow, let us embrace
      one another and kiss for the last time!"
    

      Ognev, limp with emotion, kissed the old man once more and began going
      down the steps. On the last step he looked round and asked: "Shall we meet
      again some day?"
    

      "God knows!" said the old man. "Most likely not!"
    

      "Yes, that's true! Nothing will tempt you to Petersburg and I am never
      likely to turn up in this district again. Well, good-bye!"
    

      "You had better leave the books behind!" Kuznetsov called after him. "You
      don't want to drag such a weight with you. I would send them by a servant
      to-morrow!"
    

      But Ognev was rapidly walking away from the house and was not listening.
      His heart, warmed by the wine, was brimming over with good-humour,
      friendliness, and sadness. He walked along thinking how frequently one met
      with good people, and what a pity it was that nothing was left of those
      meetings but memories. At times one catches a glimpse of cranes on the
      horizon, and a faint gust of wind brings their plaintive, ecstatic cry,
      and a minute later, however greedily one scans the blue distance, one
      cannot see a speck nor catch a sound; and like that, people with their
      faces and their words flit through our lives and are drowned in the past,
      leaving nothing except faint traces in the memory. Having been in the N--
      District from the early spring, and having been almost every day at the
      friendly Kuznetsovs', Ivan Alexeyitch had become as much at home with the
      old man, his daughter, and the servants as though they were his own
      people; he had grown familiar with the whole house to the smallest detail,
      with the cosy verandah, the windings of the avenues, the silhouettes of
      the trees over the kitchen and the bath-house; but as soon as he was out
      of the gate all this would be changed to memory and would lose its meaning
      as reality for ever, and in a year or two all these dear images would grow
      as dim in his consciousness as stories he had read or things he had
      imagined.
    

      "Nothing in life is so precious as people!" Ognev thought in his emotion,
      as he strode along the avenue to the gate. "Nothing!"
    

      It was warm and still in the garden. There was a scent of the mignonette,
      of the tobacco-plants, and of the heliotrope, which were not yet over in
      the flower-beds. The spaces between the bushes and the tree-trunks were
      filled with a fine soft mist soaked through and through with moonlight,
      and, as Ognev long remembered, coils of mist that looked like phantoms
      slowly but perceptibly followed one another across the avenue. The moon
      stood high above the garden, and below it transparent patches of mist were
      floating eastward. The whole world seemed to consist of nothing but black
      silhouettes and wandering white shadows. Ognev, seeing the mist on a
      moonlight August evening almost for the first time in his life, imagined
      he was seeing, not nature, but a stage effect in which unskilful workmen,
      trying to light up the garden with white Bengal fire, hid behind the
      bushes and let off clouds of white smoke together with the light.
    

      When Ognev reached the garden gate a dark shadow moved away from the low
      fence and came towards him.
    

      "Vera Gavrilovna!" he said, delighted. "You here? And I have been looking
      everywhere for you; wanted to say good-bye. . . . Good-bye; I am going
      away!"
    

      "So early? Why, it's only eleven o'clock."
    

      "Yes, it's time I was off. I have a four-mile walk and then my packing. I
      must be up early to-morrow."
    

      Before Ognev stood Kuznetsov's daughter Vera, a girl of one-and-twenty, as
      usual melancholy, carelessly dressed, and attractive. Girls who are dreamy
      and spend whole days lying down, lazily reading whatever they come across,
      who are bored and melancholy, are usually careless in their dress. To
      those of them who have been endowed by nature with taste and an instinct
      of beauty, the slight carelessness adds a special charm. When Ognev later
      on remembered her, he could not picture pretty Verotchka except in a full
      blouse which was crumpled in deep folds at the belt and yet did not touch
      her waist; without her hair done up high and a curl that had come loose
      from it on her forehead; without the knitted red shawl with ball fringe at
      the edge which hung disconsolately on Vera's shoulders in the evenings,
      like a flag on a windless day, and in the daytime lay about, crushed up,
      in the hall near the men's hats or on a box in the dining-room, where the
      old cat did not hesitate to sleep on it. This shawl and the folds of her
      blouse suggested a feeling of freedom and laziness, of good-nature and
      sitting at home. Perhaps because Vera attracted Ognev he saw in every
      frill and button something warm, naÃ¯ve, cosy, something nice and poetical,
      just what is lacking in cold, insincere women that have no instinct for
      beauty.
    

      Verotchka had a good figure, a regular profile, and beautiful curly hair.
      Ognev, who had seen few women in his life, thought her a beauty.
    

      "I am going away," he said as he took leave of her at the gate. "Don't
      remember evil against me! Thank you for everything!"
    

      In the same singing divinity student's voice in which he had talked to her
      father, with the same blinking and twitching of his shoulders, he began
      thanking Vera for her hospitality, kindness, and friendliness.
    

      "I've written about you in every letter to my mother," he said. "If
      everyone were like you and your dad, what a jolly place the world would
      be! You are such a splendid set of people! All such genuine, friendly
      people with no nonsense about you."
    

      "Where are you going to now?" asked Vera.
    

      "I am going now to my mother's at Oryol; I shall be a fortnight with her,
      and then back to Petersburg and work."
    

      "And then?"
    

      "And then? I shall work all the winter and in the spring go somewhere into
      the provinces again to collect material. Well, be happy, live a hundred
      years . . . don't remember evil against me. We shall not see each other
      again."
    

      Ognev stooped down and kissed Vera's hand. Then, in silent emotion, he
      straightened his cape, shifted his bundle of books to a more comfortable
      position, paused, and said:
    

      "What a lot of mist!"
    

      "Yes. Have you left anything behind?"
    

      "No, I don't think so. . . ."
    

      For some seconds Ognev stood in silence, then he moved clumsily towards
      the gate and went out of the garden.
    

      "Stay; I'll see you as far as our wood," said Vera, following him out.
    

      They walked along the road. Now the trees did not obscure the view, and
      one could see the sky and the distance. As though covered with a veil all
      nature was hidden in a transparent, colourless haze through which her
      beauty peeped gaily; where the mist was thicker and whiter it lay heaped
      unevenly about the stones, stalks, and bushes or drifted in coils over the
      road, clung close to the earth and seemed trying not to conceal the view.
      Through the haze they could see all the road as far as the wood, with dark
      ditches at the sides and tiny bushes which grew in the ditches and caught
      the straying wisps of mist. Half a mile from the gate they saw the dark
      patch of Kuznetsov's wood.
    

      "Why has she come with me? I shall have to see her back," thought Ognev,
      but looking at her profile he gave a friendly smile and said: "One doesn't
      want to go away in such lovely weather. It's quite a romantic evening,
      with the moon, the stillness, and all the etceteras. Do you know, Vera
      Gavrilovna, here I have lived twenty-nine years in the world and never had
      a romance. No romantic episode in my whole life, so that I only know by
      hearsay of rendezvous, 'avenues of sighs,' and kisses. It's not normal! In
      town, when one sits in one's lodgings, one does not notice the blank, but
      here in the fresh air one feels it. . . . One resents it!"
    

      "Why is it?"
    

      "I don't know. I suppose I've never had time, or perhaps it was I have
      never met women who. . . . In fact, I have very few acquaintances and
      never go anywhere."
    

      For some three hundred paces the young people walked on in silence. Ognev
      kept glancing at Verotchka's bare head and shawl, and days of spring and
      summer rose to his mind one after another. It had been a period when far
      from his grey Petersburg lodgings, enjoying the friendly warmth of kind
      people, nature, and the work he loved, he had not had time to notice how
      the sunsets followed the glow of dawn, and how, one after another
      foretelling the end of summer, first the nightingale ceased singing, then
      the quail, then a little later the landrail. The days slipped by
      unnoticed, so that life must have been happy and easy. He began calling
      aloud how reluctantly he, poor and unaccustomed to change of scene and
      society, had come at the end of April to the N-- District, where he had
      expected dreariness, loneliness, and indifference to statistics, which he
      considered was now the foremost among the sciences. When he arrived on an
      April morning at the little town of N-- he had put up at the inn kept by
      Ryabuhin, the Old Believer, where for twenty kopecks a day they had given
      him a light, clean room on condition that he should not smoke indoors.
      After resting and finding who was the president of the District Zemstvo,
      he had set off at once on foot to Kuznetsov. He had to walk three miles
      through lush meadows and young copses. Larks were hovering in the clouds,
      filling the air with silvery notes, and rooks flapping their wings with
      sedate dignity floated over the green cornland.
    

      "Good heavens!" Ognev had thought in wonder; "can it be that there's
      always air like this to breathe here, or is this scent only to-day, in
      honour of my coming?"
    

      Expecting a cold business-like reception, he went in to Kuznetsov's
      diffidently, looking up from under his eyebrows and shyly pulling his
      beard. At first Kuznetsov wrinkled up his brows and could not understand
      what use the Zemstvo could be to the young man and his statistics; but
      when the latter explained at length what was material for statistics and
      how such material was collected, Kuznetsov brightened, smiled, and with
      childish curiosity began looking at his notebooks. On the evening of the
      same day Ivan Alexeyitch was already sitting at supper with the
      Kuznetsovs, was rapidly becoming exhilarated by their strong home-made
      wine, and looking at the calm faces and lazy movements of his new
      acquaintances, felt all over that sweet, drowsy indolence which makes one
      want to sleep and stretch and smile; while his new acquaintances looked at
      him good-naturedly and asked him whether his father and mother were
      living, how much he earned a month, how often he went to the theatre. . .
      .
    

      Ognev recalled his expeditions about the neighbourhood, the picnics, the
      fishing parties, the visit of the whole party to the convent to see the
      Mother Superior Marfa, who had given each of the visitors a bead purse; he
      recalled the hot, endless typically Russian arguments in which the
      opponents, spluttering and banging the table with their fists,
      misunderstand and interrupt one another, unconsciously contradict
      themselves at every phrase, continually change the subject, and after
      arguing for two or three hours, laugh and say: "Goodness knows what we
      have been arguing about! Beginning with one thing and going on to
      another!"
    

      "And do you remember how the doctor and you and I rode to Shestovo?" said
      Ivan Alexeyitch to Vera as they reached the copse. "It was there that the
      crazy saint met us: I gave him a five-kopeck piece, and he crossed himself
      three times and flung it into the rye. Good heavens! I am carrying away
      such a mass of memories that if I could gather them together into a whole
      it would make a good nugget of gold! I don't understand why clever,
      perceptive people crowd into Petersburg and Moscow and don't come here. Is
      there more truth and freedom in the Nevsky and in the big damp houses than
      here? Really, the idea of artists, scientific men, and journalists all
      living crowded together in furnished rooms has always seemed to me a
      mistake."
    

      Twenty paces from the copse the road was crossed by a small narrow bridge
      with posts at the corners, which had always served as a resting-place for
      the Kuznetsovs and their guests on their evening walks. From there those
      who liked could mimic the forest echo, and one could see the road vanish
      in the dark woodland track.
    

      "Well, here is the bridge!" said Ognev. "Here you must turn back."
    

      Vera stopped and drew a breath.
    

      "Let us sit down," she said, sitting down on one of the posts. "People
      generally sit down when they say good-bye before starting on a journey."
    

      Ognev settled himself beside her on his bundle of books and went on
      talking. She was breathless from the walk, and was looking, not at Ivan
      Alexeyitch, but away into the distance so that he could not see her face.
    

      "And what if we meet in ten years' time?" he said. "What shall we be like
      then? You will be by then the respectable mother of a family, and I shall
      be the author of some weighty statistical work of no use to anyone, as
      thick as forty thousand such works. We shall meet and think of old days. .
      . . Now we are conscious of the present; it absorbs and excites us, but
      when we meet we shall not remember the day, nor the month, nor even the
      year in which we saw each other for the last time on this bridge. You will
      be changed, perhaps . . . . Tell me, will you be different?"
    

      Vera started and turned her face towards him.
    

      "What?" she asked.
    

      "I asked you just now. . . ."
    

      "Excuse me, I did not hear what you were saying."
    

      Only then Ognev noticed a change in Vera. She was pale, breathing fast,
      and the tremor in her breathing affected her hands and lips and head, and
      not one curl as usual, but two, came loose and fell on her forehead. . . .
      Evidently she avoided looking him in the face, and, trying to mask her
      emotion, at one moment fingered her collar, which seemed to be rasping her
      neck, at another pulled her red shawl from one shoulder to the other.
    

      "I am afraid you are cold," said Ognev. "It's not at all wise to sit in
      the mist. Let me see you back nach-haus."
    

      Vera sat mute.
    

      "What is the matter?" asked Ognev, with a smile. "You sit silent and don't
      answer my questions. Are you cross, or don't you feel well?"
    

      Vera pressed the palm of her hand to the cheek nearest to Ognev, and then
      abruptly jerked it away.
    

      "An awful position!" she murmured, with a look of pain on her face.
      "Awful!"
    

      "How is it awful?" asked Ognev, shrugging his shoulders and not concealing
      his surprise. "What's the matter?"
    

      Still breathing hard and twitching her shoulders, Vera turned her back to
      him, looked at the sky for half a minute, and said:
    

      "There is something I must say to you, Ivan Alexeyitch. . . ."
    

      "I am listening."
    

      "It may seem strange to you. . . . You will be surprised, but I don't
      care. . . ."
    

      Ognev shrugged his shoulders once more and prepared himself to listen.
    

      "You see . . ." Verotchka began, bowing her head and fingering a ball on
      the fringe of her shawl. "You see . . . this is what I wanted to tell you.
      . . . You'll think it strange . . . and silly, but I . . . can't bear it
      any longer."
    

      Vera's words died away in an indistinct mutter and were suddenly cut short
      by tears. The girl hid her face in her handkerchief, bent lower than ever,
      and wept bitterly. Ivan Alexeyitch cleared his throat in confusion and
      looked about him hopelessly, at his wits' end, not knowing what to say or
      do. Being unused to the sight of tears, he felt his own eyes, too,
      beginning to smart.
    

      "Well, what next!" he muttered helplessly. "Vera Gavrilovna, what's this
      for, I should like to know? My dear girl, are you . . . are you ill? Or
      has someone been nasty to you? Tell me, perhaps I could, so to say . . .
      help you. . . ."
    

      When, trying to console her, he ventured cautiously to remove her hands
      from her face, she smiled at him through her tears and said:
    

      "I . . . love you!"
    

      These words, so simple and ordinary, were uttered in ordinary human
      language, but Ognev, in acute embarrassment, turned away from Vera, and
      got up, while his confusion was followed by terror.
    

      The sad, warm, sentimental mood induced by leave-taking and the home-made
      wine suddenly vanished, and gave place to an acute and unpleasant feeling
      of awkwardness. He felt an inward revulsion; he looked askance at Vera,
      and now that by declaring her love for him she had cast off the aloofness
      which so adds to a woman's charm, she seemed to him, as it were, shorter,
      plainer, more ordinary.
    

      "What's the meaning of it?" he thought with horror. "But I . . . do I love
      her or not? That's the question!"
    

      And she breathed easily and freely now that the worst and most difficult
      thing was said. She, too, got up, and looking Ivan Alexeyitch straight in
      the face, began talking rapidly, warmly, irrepressibly.
    

      As a man suddenly panic-stricken cannot afterwards remember the succession
      of sounds accompanying the catastrophe that overwhelmed him, so Ognev
      cannot remember Vera's words and phrases. He can only recall the meaning
      of what she said, and the sensation her words evoked in him. He remembers
      her voice, which seemed stifled and husky with emotion, and the
      extraordinary music and passion of her intonation. Laughing, crying with
      tears glistening on her eyelashes, she told him that from the first day of
      their acquaintance he had struck her by his originality, his intelligence,
      his kind intelligent eyes, by his work and objects in life; that she loved
      him passionately, deeply, madly; that when coming into the house from the
      garden in the summer she saw his cape in the hall or heard his voice in
      the distance, she felt a cold shudder at her heart, a foreboding of
      happiness; even his slightest jokes had made her laugh; in every figure in
      his note-books she saw something extraordinarily wise and grand; his
      knotted stick seemed to her more beautiful than the trees.
    

      The copse and the wisps of mist and the black ditches at the side of the
      road seemed hushed listening to her, whilst something strange and
      unpleasant was passing in Ognev's heart. . . . Telling him of her love,
      Vera was enchantingly beautiful; she spoke eloquently and passionately,
      but he felt neither pleasure nor gladness, as he would have liked to; he
      felt nothing but compassion for Vera, pity and regret that a good girl
      should be distressed on his account. Whether he was affected by
      generalizations from reading or by the insuperable habit of looking at
      things objectively, which so often hinders people from living, but Vera's
      ecstasies and suffering struck him as affected, not to be taken seriously,
      and at the same time rebellious feeling whispered to him that all he was
      hearing and seeing now, from the point of view of nature and personal
      happiness, was more important than any statistics and books and truths. .
      . . And he raged and blamed himself, though he did not understand exactly
      where he was in fault.
    

      To complete his embarrassment, he was absolutely at a loss what to say,
      and yet something he must say. To say bluntly, "I don't love you," was
      beyond him, and he could not bring himself to say "Yes," because however
      much he rummaged in his heart he could not find one spark of feeling in
      it. . . .
    

      He was silent, and she meanwhile was saying that for her there was no
      greater happiness than to see him, to follow him wherever he liked this
      very moment, to be his wife and helper, and that if he went away from her
      she would die of misery.
    

      "I cannot stay here!" she said, wringing her hands. "I am sick of the
      house and this wood and the air. I cannot bear the everlasting peace and
      aimless life, I can't endure our colourless, pale people, who are all as
      like one another as two drops of water! They are all good-natured and
      warm-hearted because they are all well-fed and know nothing of struggle or
      suffering, . . . I want to be in those big damp houses where people
      suffer, embittered by work and need. . ."
    

      And this, too, seemed to Ognev affected and not to be taken seriously.
      When Vera had finished he still did not know what to say, but it was
      impossible to be silent, and he muttered:
    

      "Vera Gavrilovna, I am very grateful to you, though I feel I've done
      nothing to deserve such . . . feeling . . . on your part. Besides, as an
      honest man I ought to tell you that . . . happiness depends on
      equality-that is, when both parties are . . . equally in love. . . ."
    

      But he was immediately ashamed of his mutterings and ceased. He felt that
      his face at that moment looked stupid, guilty, blank, that it was strained
      and affected. . . . Vera must have been able to read the truth on his
      countenance, for she suddenly became grave, turned pale, and bent her
      head.
    

      "You must forgive me," Ognev muttered, not able to endure the silence. "I
      respect you so much that . . . it pains me. . . ."
    

      Vera turned sharply and walked rapidly homewards. Ognev followed her.
    

      "No, don't!" said Vera, with a wave of her hand. "Don't come; I can go
      alone."
    

      "Oh, yes . . . I must see you home anyway."
    

      Whatever Ognev said, it all to the last word struck him as loathsome and
      flat. The feeling of guilt grew greater at every step. He raged inwardly,
      clenched his fists, and cursed his coldness and his stupidity with women.
      Trying to stir his feelings, he looked at Verotchka's beautiful figure, at
      her hair and the traces of her little feet on the dusty road; he
      remembered her words and her tears, but all that only touched his heart
      and did not quicken his pulse.
    

      "Ach! one can't force oneself to love," he assured himself, and at the
      same time he thought, "But shall I ever fall in love without? I am nearly
      thirty! I have never met anyone better than Vera and I never shall. . . .
      Oh, this premature old age! Old age at thirty!"
    

      Vera walked on in front more and more rapidly, without looking back at him
      or raising her head. It seemed to him that sorrow had made her thinner and
      narrower in the shoulders.
    

      "I can imagine what's going on in her heart now!" he thought, looking at
      her back. "She must be ready to die with shame and mortification! My God,
      there's so much life, poetry, and meaning in it that it would move a
      stone, and I . . . I am stupid and absurd!"
    

      At the gate Vera stole a glance at him, and, shrugging and wrapping her
      shawl round her walked rapidly away down the avenue.
    

      Ivan Alexeyitch was left alone. Going back to the copse, he walked slowly,
      continually standing still and looking round at the gate with an
      expression in his whole figure that suggested that he could not believe
      his own memory. He looked for Vera's footprints on the road, and could not
      believe that the girl who had so attracted him had just declared her love,
      and that he had so clumsily and bluntly "refused" her. For the first time
      in his life it was his lot to learn by experience how little that a man
      does depends on his own will, and to suffer in his own person the feelings
      of a decent kindly man who has against his will caused his neighbour
      cruel, undeserved anguish.
    

      His conscience tormented him, and when Vera disappeared he felt as though
      he had lost something very precious, something very near and dear which he
      could never find again. He felt that with Vera a part of his youth had
      slipped away from him, and that the moments which he had passed through so
      fruitlessly would never be repeated.
    

      When he reached the bridge he stopped and sank into thought. He wanted to
      discover the reason of his strange coldness. That it was due to something
      within him and not outside himself was clear to him. He frankly
      acknowledged to himself that it was not the intellectual coldness of which
      clever people so often boast, not the coldness of a conceited fool, but
      simply impotence of soul, incapacity for being moved by beauty, premature
      old age brought on by education, his casual existence, struggling for a
      livelihood, his homeless life in lodgings. From the bridge he walked
      slowly, as it were reluctantly, into the wood. Here, where in the dense
      black darkness glaring patches of moonlight gleamed here and there, where
      he felt nothing except his thoughts, he longed passionately to regain what
      he had lost.
    

      And Ivan Alexeyitch remembers that he went back again. Urging himself on
      with his memories, forcing himself to picture Vera, he strode rapidly
      towards the garden. There was no mist by then along the road or in the
      garden, and the bright moon looked down from the sky as though it had just
      been washed; only the eastern sky was dark and misty. . . . Ognev
      remembers his cautious steps, the dark windows, the heavy scent of
      heliotrope and mignonette. His old friend Karo, wagging his tail amicably,
      came up to him and sniffed his hand. This was the one living creature who
      saw him walk two or three times round the house, stand near Vera's dark
      window, and with a deep sigh and a wave of his hand walk out of the
      garden.
    

      An hour later he was in the town, and, worn out and exhausted, leaned his
      body and hot face against the gatepost of the inn as he knocked at the
      gate. Somewhere in the town a dog barked sleepily, and as though in
      response to his knock, someone clanged the hour on an iron plate near the
      church.
    

      "You prowl about at night," grumbled his host, the Old Believer, opening
      the door to him, in a long nightgown like a woman's. "You had better be
      saying your prayers instead of prowling about."
    

      When Ivan Alexeyitch reached his room he sank on the bed and gazed a long,
      long time at the light. Then he tossed his head and began packing.
    

      MY LIFE
    

      THE STORY OF A PROVINCIAL
    

      I
    

      THE Superintendent said to me: "I only keep you out of regard for your
      worthy father; but for that you would have been sent flying long ago." I
      replied to him: "You flatter me too much, your Excellency, in assuming
      that I am capable of flying." And then I heard him say: "Take that
      gentleman away; he gets upon my nerves."
    

      Two days later I was dismissed. And in this way I have, during the years I
      have been regarded as grown up, lost nine situations, to the great
      mortification of my father, the architect of our town. I have served in
      various departments, but all these nine jobs have been as alike as one
      drop of water is to another: I had to sit, write, listen to rude or stupid
      observations, and go on doing so till I was dismissed.
    

      When I came in to my father he was sitting buried in a low arm-chair with
      his eyes closed. His dry, emaciated face, with a shade of dark blue where
      it was shaved (he looked like an old Catholic organist), expressed
      meekness and resignation. Without responding to my greeting or opening his
      eyes, he said:
    

      "If my dear wife and your mother were living, your life would have been a
      source of continual distress to her. I see the Divine Providence in her
      premature death. I beg you, unhappy boy," he continued, opening his eyes,
      "tell me: what am I to do with you?"
    

      In the past when I was younger my friends and relations had known what to
      do with me: some of them used to advise me to volunteer for the army,
      others to get a job in a pharmacy, and others in the telegraph department;
      now that I am over twenty-five, that grey hairs are beginning to show on
      my temples, and that I have been already in the army, and in a pharmacy,
      and in the telegraph department, it would seem that all earthly
      possibilities have been exhausted, and people have given up advising me,
      and merely sigh or shake their heads.
    

      "What do you think about yourself?" my father went on. "By the time they
      are your age, young men have a secure social position, while look at you:
      you are a proletarian, a beggar, a burden on your father!"
    

      And as usual he proceeded to declare that the young people of to-day were
      on the road to perdition through infidelity, materialism, and
      self-conceit, and that amateur theatricals ought to be prohibited, because
      they seduced young people from religion and their duties.
    

      "To-morrow we shall go together, and you shall apologize to the
      superintendent, and promise him to work conscientiously," he said in
      conclusion. "You ought not to remain one single day with no regular
      position in society."
    

      "I beg you to listen to me," I said sullenly, expecting nothing good from
      this conversation. "What you call a position in society is the privilege
      of capital and education. Those who have neither wealth nor education earn
      their daily bread by manual labour, and I see no grounds for my being an
      exception."
    

      "When you begin talking about manual labour it is always stupid and
      vulgar!" said my father with irritation. "Understand, you dense
      fellow-understand, you addle-pate, that besides coarse physical strength
      you have the divine spirit, a spark of the holy fire, which distinguishes
      you in the most striking way from the ass or the reptile, and brings you
      nearer to the Deity! This fire is the fruit of the efforts of the best of
      mankind during thousands of years. Your great-grandfather Poloznev, the
      general, fought at Borodino; your grandfather was a poet, an orator, and a
      Marshal of Nobility; your uncle is a schoolmaster; and lastly, I, your
      father, am an architect! All the Poloznevs have guarded the sacred fire
      for you to put it out!"
    

      "One must be just," I said. "Millions of people put up with manual
      labour."
    

      "And let them put up with it! They don't know how to do anything else!
      Anybody, even the most abject fool or criminal, is capable of manual
      labour; such labour is the distinguishing mark of the slave and the
      barbarian, while the holy fire is vouchsafed only to a few!"
    

      To continue this conversation was unprofitable. My father worshipped
      himself, and nothing was convincing to him but what he said himself.
      Besides, I knew perfectly well that the disdain with which he talked of
      physical toil was founded not so much on reverence for the sacred fire as
      on a secret dread that I should become a workman, and should set the whole
      town talking about me; what was worse, all my contemporaries had long ago
      taken their degrees and were getting on well, and the son of the manager
      of the State Bank was already a collegiate assessor, while I, his only
      son, was nothing! To continue the conversation was unprofitable and
      unpleasant, but I still sat on and feebly retorted, hoping that I might at
      last be understood. The whole question, of course, was clear and simple,
      and only concerned with the means of my earning my living; but the
      simplicity of it was not seen, and I was talked to in mawkishly rounded
      phrases of Borodino, of the sacred fire, of my uncle a forgotten poet, who
      had once written poor and artificial verses; I was rudely called an
      addlepate and a dense fellow. And how I longed to be understood! In spite
      of everything, I loved my father and my sister and it had been my habit
      from childhood to consult them-a habit so deeply rooted that I doubt
      whether I could ever have got rid of it; whether I were in the right or
      the wrong, I was in constant dread of wounding them, constantly afraid
      that my father's thin neck would turn crimson and that he would have a
      stroke.
    

      "To sit in a stuffy room," I began, "to copy, to compete with a
      typewriter, is shameful and humiliating for a man of my age. What can the
      sacred fire have to do with it?"
    

      "It's intellectual work, anyway," said my father. "But that's enough; let
      us cut short this conversation, and in any case I warn you: if you don't
      go back to your work again, but follow your contemptible propensities,
      then my daughter and I will banish you from our hearts. I shall strike you
      out of my will, I swear by the living God!"
    

      With perfect sincerity to prove the purity of the motives by which I
      wanted to be guided in all my doings, I said:
    

      "The question of inheritance does not seem very important to me. I shall
      renounce it all beforehand."
    

      For some reason or other, quite to my surprise, these words were deeply
      resented by my father. He turned crimson.
    

      "Don't dare to talk to me like that, stupid!" he shouted in a thin, shrill
      voice. "Wastrel!" and with a rapid, skilful, and habitual movement he
      slapped me twice in the face. "You are forgetting yourself."
    

      When my father beat me as a child I had to stand up straight, with my
      hands held stiffly to my trouser seams, and look him straight in the face.
      And now when he hit me I was utterly overwhelmed, and, as though I were
      still a child, drew myself up and tried to look him in the face. My father
      was old and very thin but his delicate muscles must have been as strong as
      leather, for his blows hurt a good deal.
    

      I staggered back into the passage, and there he snatched up his umbrella,
      and with it hit me several times on the head and shoulders; at that moment
      my sister opened the drawing-room door to find out what the noise was, but
      at once turned away with a look of horror and pity without uttering a word
      in my defence.
    

      My determination not to return to the Government office, but to begin a
      new life of toil, was not to be shaken. All that was left for me to do was
      to fix upon the special employment, and there was no particular difficulty
      about that, as it seemed to me that I was very strong and fitted for the
      very heaviest labour. I was faced with a monotonous life of toil in the
      midst of hunger, coarseness, and stench, continually preoccupied with
      earning my daily bread. And-who knows?-as I returned from my work along
      Great Dvoryansky Street, I might very likely envy Dolzhikov, the engineer,
      who lived by intellectual work, but, at the moment, thinking over all my
      future hardships made me light-hearted. At times I had dreamed of
      spiritual activity, imagining myself a teacher, a doctor, or a writer, but
      these dreams remained dreams. The taste for intellectual pleasures-for the
      theatre, for instance, and for reading-was a passion with me, but whether
      I had any ability for intellectual work I don't know. At school I had had
      an unconquerable aversion for Greek, so that I was only in the fourth
      class when they had to take me from school. For a long while I had coaches
      preparing me for the fifth class. Then I served in various Government
      offices, spending the greater part of the day in complete idleness, and I
      was told that was intellectual work. My activity in the scholastic and
      official sphere had required neither mental application nor talent, nor
      special qualifications, nor creative impulse; it was mechanical. Such
      intellectual work I put on a lower level than physical toil; I despise it,
      and I don't think that for one moment it could serve as a justification
      for an idle, careless life, as it is indeed nothing but a sham, one of the
      forms of that same idleness. Real intellectual work I have in all
      probability never known.
    

      Evening came on. We lived in Great Dvoryansky Street; it was the principal
      street in the town, and in the absence of decent public gardens our beau
      monde used to use it as a promenade in the evenings. This charming
      street did to some extent take the place of a public garden, as on each
      side of it there was a row of poplars which smelt sweet, particularly
      after rain, and acacias, tall bushes of lilac, wild-cherries and
      apple-trees hung over the fences and palings. The May twilight, the tender
      young greenery with its shifting shades, the scent of the lilac, the
      buzzing of the insects, the stillness, the warmth-how fresh and marvellous
      it all is, though spring is repeated every year! I stood at the garden
      gate and watched the passers-by. With most of them I had grown up and at
      one time played pranks; now they might have been disconcerted by my being
      near them, for I was poorly and unfashionably dressed, and they used to
      say of my very narrow trousers and huge, clumsy boots that they were like
      sticks of macaroni stuck in boats. Besides, I had a bad reputation in the
      town because I had no decent social position, and used often to play
      billiards in cheap taverns, and also, perhaps, because I had on two
      occasions been hauled up before an officer of the police, though I had
      done nothing whatever to account for this.
    

      In the big house opposite someone was playing the piano at Dolzhikov's. It
      was beginning to get dark, and stars were twinkling in the sky. Here my
      father, in an old top-hat with wide upturned brim, walked slowly by with
      my sister on his arm, bowing in response to greetings.
    

      "Look up," he said to my sister, pointing to the sky with the same
      umbrella with which he had beaten me that afternoon. "Look up at the sky!
      Even the tiniest stars are all worlds! How insignificant is man in
      comparison with the universe!"
    

      And he said this in a tone that suggested that it was particularly
      agreeable and flattering to him that he was so insignificant. How
      absolutely devoid of talent and imagination he was! Sad to say, he was the
      only architect in the town, and in the fifteen to twenty years that I
      could remember not one single decent house had been built in it. When any
      one asked him to plan a house, he usually drew first the reception hall
      and drawing-room: just as in old days the boarding-school misses always
      started from the stove when they danced, so his artistic ideas could only
      begin and develop from the hall and drawing-room. To them he tacked on a
      dining-room, a nursery, a study, linking the rooms together with doors,
      and so they all inevitably turned into passages, and every one of them had
      two or even three unnecessary doors. His imagination must have been
      lacking in clearness, extremely muddled, curtailed. As though feeling that
      something was lacking, he invariably had recourse to all sorts of
      outbuildings, planting one beside another; and I can see now the narrow
      entries, the poky little passages, the crooked staircases leading to
      half-landings where one could not stand upright, and where, instead of a
      floor, there were three huge steps like the shelves of a bath-house; and
      the kitchen was invariably in the basement with a brick floor and vaulted
      ceilings. The front of the house had a harsh, stubborn expression; the
      lines of it were stiff and timid; the roof was low-pitched and, as it
      were, squashed down; and the fat, well-fed-looking chimneys were
      invariably crowned by wire caps with squeaking black cowls. And for some
      reason all these houses, built by my father exactly like one another,
      vaguely reminded me of his top-hat and the back of his head, stiff and
      stubborn-looking. In the course of years they have grown used in the town
      to the poverty of my father's imagination. It has taken root and become
      our local style.
    

      This same style my father had brought into my sister's life also,
      beginning with christening her Kleopatra (just as he had named me Misail).
      When she was a little girl he scared her by references to the stars, to
      the sages of ancient times, to our ancestors, and discoursed at length on
      the nature of life and duty; and now, when she was twenty-six, he kept up
      the same habits, allowing her to walk arm in arm with no one but himself,
      and imagining for some reason that sooner or later a suitable young man
      would be sure to appear, and to desire to enter into matrimony with her
      from respect for his personal qualities. She adored my father, feared him,
      and believed in his exceptional intelligence.
    

      It was quite dark, and gradually the street grew empty. The music had
      ceased in the house opposite; the gate was thrown wide open, and a team
      with three horses trotted frolicking along our street with a soft tinkle
      of little bells. That was the engineer going for a drive with his
      daughter. It was bedtime.
    

      I had my own room in the house, but I lived in a shed in the yard, under
      the same roof as a brick barn which had been built some time or other,
      probably to keep harness in; great hooks were driven into the wall. Now it
      was not wanted, and for the last thirty years my father had stowed away in
      it his newspapers, which for some reason he had bound in half-yearly
      volumes and allowed nobody to touch. Living here, I was less liable to be
      seen by my father and his visitors, and I fancied that if I did not live
      in a real room, and did not go into the house every day to dinner, my
      father's words that I was a burden upon him did not sound so offensive.
    

      My sister was waiting for me. Unseen by my father, she had brought me some
      supper: not a very large slice of cold veal and a piece of bread. In our
      house such sayings as: "A penny saved is a penny gained," and "Take care
      of the pence and the pounds will take care of themselves," and so on, were
      frequently repeated, and my sister, weighed down by these vulgar maxims,
      did her utmost to cut down the expenses, and so we fared badly. Putting
      the plate on the table, she sat down on my bed and began to cry.
    

      "Misail," she said, "what a way to treat us!"
    

      She did not cover her face; her tears dropped on her bosom and hands, and
      there was a look of distress on her face. She fell back on the pillow, and
      abandoned herself to her tears, sobbing and quivering all over.
    

      "You have left the service again . . ." she articulated. "Oh, how awful it
      is!"
    

      "But do understand, sister, do understand . . . ." I said, and I was
      overcome with despair because she was crying.
    

      As ill-luck would have it, the kerosene in my little lamp was exhausted;
      it began to smoke, and was on the point of going out, and the old hooks on
      the walls looked down sullenly, and their shadows flickered.
    

      "Have mercy on us," said my sister, sitting up. "Father is in terrible
      distress and I am ill; I shall go out of my mind. What will become of
      you?" she said, sobbing and stretching out her arms to me. "I beg you, I
      implore you, for our dear mother's sake, I beg you to go back to the
      office!"
    

      "I can't, Kleopatra!" I said, feeling that a little more and I should give
      way. "I cannot!"
    

      "Why not?" my sister went on. "Why not? Well, if you can't get on with the
      Head, look out for another post. Why shouldn't you get a situation on the
      railway, for instance? I have just been talking to Anyuta Blagovo; she
      declares they would take you on the railway-line, and even promised to try
      and get a post for you. For God's sake, Misail, think a little! Think a
      little, I implore you."
    

      We talked a little longer and I gave way. I said that the thought of a job
      on the railway that was being constructed had never occurred to me, and
      that if she liked I was ready to try it.
    

      She smiled joyfully through her tears and squeezed my hand, and then went
      on crying because she could not stop, while I went to the kitchen for some
      kerosene.
    

      II
    

      Among the devoted supporters of amateur theatricals, concerts and tableaux
      vivants for charitable objects the Azhogins, who lived in their own
      house in Great Dvoryansky Street, took a foremost place; they always
      provided the room, and took upon themselves all the troublesome
      arrangements and the expenses. They were a family of wealthy landowners
      who had an estate of some nine thousand acres in the district and a
      capital house, but they did not care for the country, and lived winter and
      summer alike in the town. The family consisted of the mother, a tall,
      spare, refined lady, with short hair, a short jacket, and a flat-looking
      skirt in the English fashion, and three daughters who, when they were
      spoken of, were called not by their names but simply: the eldest, the
      middle, and the youngest. They all had ugly sharp chins, and were
      short-sighted and round-shouldered. They were dressed like their mother,
      they lisped disagreeably, and yet, in spite of that, infallibly took part
      in every performance and were continually doing something with a
      charitable object-acting, reciting, singing. They were very serious and
      never smiled, and even in a musical comedy they played without the
      faintest trace of gaiety, with a businesslike air, as though they were
      engaged in bookkeeping.
    

      I loved our theatricals, especially the numerous, noisy, and rather
      incoherent rehearsals, after which they always gave a supper. In the
      choice of the plays and the distribution of the parts I had no hand at
      all. The post assigned to me lay behind the scenes. I painted the scenes,
      copied out the parts, prompted, made up the actors' faces; and I was
      entrusted, too, with various stage effects such as thunder, the singing of
      nightingales, and so on. Since I had no proper social position and no
      decent clothes, at the rehearsals I held aloof from the rest in the
      shadows of the wings and maintained a shy silence.
    

      I painted the scenes at the Azhogins' either in the barn or in the yard. I
      was assisted by Andrey Ivanov, a house painter, or, as he called himself,
      a contractor for all kinds of house decorations, a tall, very thin, pale
      man of fifty, with a hollow chest, with sunken temples, with blue rings
      round his eyes, rather terrible to look at in fact. He was afflicted with
      some internal malady, and every autumn and spring people said that he
      wouldn't recover, but after being laid up for a while he would get up and
      say afterwards with surprise: "I have escaped dying again."
    

      In the town he was called Radish, and they declared that this was his real
      name. He was as fond of the theatre as I was, and as soon as rumours
      reached him that a performance was being got up he threw aside all his
      work and went to the Azhogins' to paint scenes.
    

      The day after my talk with my sister, I was working at the Azhogins' from
      morning till night. The rehearsal was fixed for seven o'clock in the
      evening, and an hour before it began all the amateurs were gathered
      together in the hall, and the eldest, the middle, and the youngest
      Azhogins were pacing about the stage, reading from manuscript books.
      Radish, in a long rusty-red overcoat and a scarf muffled round his neck,
      already stood leaning with his head against the wall, gazing with a devout
      expression at the stage. Madame Azhogin went up first to one and then to
      another guest, saying something agreeable to each. She had a way of gazing
      into one's face, and speaking softly as though telling a secret.
    

      "It must be difficult to paint scenery," she said softly, coming up to me.
      "I was just talking to Madame Mufke about superstitions when I saw you
      come in. My goodness, my whole life I have been waging war against
      superstitions! To convince the servants what nonsense all their terrors
      are, I always light three candles, and begin all my important undertakings
      on the thirteenth of the month."
    

      Dolzhikov's daughter came in, a plump, fair beauty, dressed, as people
      said, in everything from Paris. She did not act, but a chair was set for
      her on the stage at the rehearsals, and the performances never began till
      she had appeared in the front row, dazzling and astounding everyone with
      her fine clothes. As a product of the capital she was allowed to make
      remarks during the rehearsals; and she did so with a sweet indulgent
      smile, and one could see that she looked upon our performance as a
      childish amusement. It was said she had studied singing at the Petersburg
      Conservatoire, and even sang for a whole winter in a private opera. I
      thought her very charming, and I usually watched her through the
      rehearsals and performances without taking my eyes off her.
    

      I had just picked up the manuscript book to begin prompting when my sister
      suddenly made her appearance. Without taking off her cloak or hat, she
      came up to me and said:
    

      "Come along, I beg you."
    

      I went with her. Anyuta Blagovo, also in her hat and wearing a dark veil,
      was standing behind the scenes at the door. She was the daughter of the
      Assistant President of the Court, who had held that office in our town
      almost ever since the establishment of the circuit court. Since she was
      tall and had a good figure, her assistance was considered indispensable
      for tableaux vivants, and when she represented a fairy or something
      like Glory her face burned with shame; but she took no part in dramatic
      performances, and came to the rehearsals only for a moment on some special
      errand, and did not go into the hall. Now, too, it was evident that she
      had only looked in for a minute.
    

      "My father was speaking about you," she said drily, blushing and not
      looking at me. "Dolzhikov has promised you a post on the railway-line.
      Apply to him to-morrow; he will be at home."
    

      I bowed and thanked her for the trouble she had taken.
    

      "And you can give up this," she said, indicating the exercise book.
    

      My sister and she went up to Madame Azhogin and for two minutes they were
      whispering with her looking towards me; they were consulting about
      something.
    

      "Yes, indeed," said Madame Azhogin, softly coming up to me and looking
      intently into my face. "Yes, indeed, if this distracts you from serious
      pursuits"-she took the manuscript book from my hands-"you can hand it over
      to someone else; don't distress yourself, my friend, go home, and good
      luck to you."
    

      I said good-bye to her, and went away overcome with confusion. As I went
      down the stairs I saw my sister and Anyuta Blagovo going away; they were
      hastening along, talking eagerly about something, probably about my going
      into the railway service. My sister had never been at a rehearsal before,
      and now she was most likely conscience-stricken, and afraid her father
      might find out that, without his permission, she had been to the
      Azhogins'!
    

      I went to Dolzhikov's next day between twelve and one. The footman
      conducted me into a very beautiful room, which was the engineer's
      drawing-room, and, at the same time, his working study. Everything here
      was soft and elegant, and, for a man so unaccustomed to luxury as I was,
      it seemed strange. There were costly rugs, huge arm-chairs, bronzes,
      pictures, gold and plush frames; among the photographs scattered about the
      walls there were very beautiful women, clever, lovely faces, easy
      attitudes; from the drawing-room there was a door leading straight into
      the garden on to a verandah: one could see lilac-trees; one could see a
      table laid for lunch, a number of bottles, a bouquet of roses; there was a
      fragrance of spring and expensive cigars, a fragrance of happiness-and
      everything seemed as though it would say: "Here is a man who has lived and
      laboured, and has attained at last the happiness possible on earth." The
      engineer's daughter was sitting at the writing-table, reading a newspaper.
    

      "You have come to see my father?" she asked. "He is having a shower bath;
      he will be here directly. Please sit down and wait."
    

      I sat down.
    

      "I believe you live opposite?" she questioned me, after a brief silence.
    

      "Yes."
    

      "I am so bored that I watch you every day out of the window; you must
      excuse me," she went on, looking at the newspaper, "and I often see your
      sister; she always has such a look of kindness and concentration."
    

      Dolzhikov came in. He was rubbing his neck with a towel.
    

      "Papa, Monsieur Poloznev," said his daughter.
    

      "Yes, yes, Blagovo was telling me," he turned briskly to me without giving
      me his hand. "But listen, what can I give you? What sort of posts have I
      got? You are a queer set of people!" he went on aloud in a tone as though
      he were giving me a lecture. "A score of you keep coming to me every day;
      you imagine I am the head of a department! I am constructing a
      railway-line, my friends; I have employment for heavy labour: I need
      mechanics, smiths, navvies, carpenters, well-sinkers, and none of you can
      do anything but sit and write! You are all clerks."
    

      And he seemed to me to have the same air of happiness as his rugs and easy
      chairs. He was stout and healthy, ruddy-cheeked and broad-chested, in a
      print cotton shirt and full trousers like a toy china sledge-driver. He
      had a curly, round beard-and not a single grey hair-a hooked nose, and
      clear, dark, guileless eyes.
    

      "What can you do?" he went on. "There is nothing you can do! I am an
      engineer. I am a man of an assured position, but before they gave me a
      railway-line I was for years in harness; I have been a practical mechanic.
      For two years I worked in Belgium as an oiler. You can judge for yourself,
      my dear fellow, what kind of work can I offer you?"
    

      "Of course that is so . . ." I muttered in extreme confusion, unable to
      face his clear, guileless eyes.
    

      "Can you work the telegraph, any way?" he asked, after a moment's thought.
    

      "Yes, I have been a telegraph clerk."
    

      "Hm! Well, we will see then. Meanwhile, go to Dubetchnya. I have got a
      fellow there, but he is a wretched creature."
    

      "And what will my duties consist of?" I asked.
    

      "We shall see. Go there; meanwhile I will make arrangements. Only please
      don't get drunk, and don't worry me with requests of any sort, or I shall
      send you packing."
    

      He turned away from me without even a nod.
    

      I bowed to him and his daughter who was reading a newspaper, and went
      away. My heart felt so heavy, that when my sister began asking me how the
      engineer had received me, I could not utter a single word.
    

      I got up early in the morning, at sunrise, to go to Dubetchnya. There was
      not a soul in our Great Dvoryansky Street; everyone was asleep, and my
      footsteps rang out with a solitary, hollow sound. The poplars, covered
      with dew, filled the air with soft fragrance. I was sad, and did not want
      to go away from the town. I was fond of my native town. It seemed to be so
      beautiful and so snug! I loved the fresh greenery, the still, sunny
      morning, the chiming of our bells; but the people with whom I lived in
      this town were boring, alien to me, sometimes even repulsive. I did not
      like them nor understand them.
    

      I did not understand what these sixty-five thousand people lived for and
      by. I knew that Kimry lived by boots, that Tula made samovars and guns,
      that Odessa was a sea-port, but what our town was, and what it did, I did
      not know. Great Dvoryansky Street and the two other smartest streets lived
      on the interest of capital, or on salaries received by officials from the
      public treasury; but what the other eight streets, which ran parallel for
      over two miles and vanished beyond the hills, lived upon, was always an
      insoluble riddle to me. And the way those people lived one is ashamed to
      describe! No garden, no theatre, no decent band; the public library and
      the club library were only visited by Jewish youths, so that the magazines
      and new books lay for months uncut; rich and well-educated people slept in
      close, stuffy bedrooms, on wooden bedsteads infested with bugs; their
      children were kept in revoltingly dirty rooms called nurseries, and the
      servants, even the old and respected ones, slept on the floor in the
      kitchen, covered with rags. On ordinary days the houses smelt of beetroot
      soup, and on fast days of sturgeon cooked in sunflower oil. The food was
      not good, and the drinking water was unwholesome. In the town council, at
      the governor's, at the head priest's, on all sides in private houses,
      people had been saying for years and years that our town had not a good
      and cheap water-supply, and that it was necessary to obtain a loan of two
      hundred thousand from the Treasury for laying on water; very rich people,
      of whom three dozen could have been counted up in our town, and who at
      times lost whole estates at cards, drank the polluted water, too, and
      talked all their lives with great excitement of a loan for the
      water-supply-and I did not understand that; it seemed to me it would have
      been simpler to take the two hundred thousand out of their own pockets and
      lay it out on that object.
    

      I did not know one honest man in the town. My father took bribes, and
      imagined that they were given him out of respect for his moral qualities;
      at the high school, in order to be moved up rapidly from class to class,
      the boys went to board with their teachers, who charged them exorbitant
      sums; the wife of the military commander took bribes from the recruits
      when they were called up before the board and even deigned to accept
      refreshments from them, and on one occasion could not get up from her
      knees in church because she was drunk; the doctors took bribes, too, when
      the recruits came up for examination, and the town doctor and the
      veterinary surgeon levied a regular tax on the butchers' shops and the
      restaurants; at the district school they did a trade in certificates,
      qualifying for partial exemption from military service; the higher clergy
      took bribes from the humbler priests and from the church elders; at the
      Municipal, the Artisans', and all the other Boards every petitioner was
      pursued by a shout: "Don't forget your thanks!" and the petitioner would
      turn back to give sixpence or a shilling. And those who did not take
      bribes, such as the higher officials of the Department of Justice, were
      haughty, offered two fingers instead of shaking hands, were distinguished
      by the frigidity and narrowness of their judgments, spent a great deal of
      time over cards, drank to excess, married heiresses, and undoubtedly had a
      pernicious corrupting influence on those around them. It was only the
      girls who had still the fresh fragrance of moral purity; most of them had
      higher impulses, pure and honest hearts; but they had no understanding of
      life, and believed that bribes were given out of respect for moral
      qualities, and after they were married grew old quickly, let themselves go
      completely, and sank hopelessly in the mire of vulgar, petty bourgeois
      existence.
    

      III
    

      A railway-line was being constructed in our neighbourhood. On the eve of
      feast days the streets were thronged with ragged fellows whom the
      townspeople called "navvies," and of whom they were afraid. And more than
      once I had seen one of these tatterdemalions with a bloodstained
      countenance being led to the police station, while a samovar or some
      linen, wet from the wash, was carried behind by way of material evidence.
      The navvies usually congregated about the taverns and the market-place;
      they drank, ate, and used bad language, and pursued with shrill whistles
      every woman of light behaviour who passed by. To entertain this hungry
      rabble our shopkeepers made cats and dogs drunk with vodka, or tied an old
      kerosene can to a dog's tail; a hue and cry was raised, and the dog dashed
      along the street, jingling the can, squealing with terror; it fancied some
      monster was close upon its heels; it would run far out of the town into
      the open country and there sink exhausted. There were in the town several
      dogs who went about trembling with their tails between their legs; and
      people said this diversion had been too much for them, and had driven them
      mad.
    

      A station was being built four miles from the town. It was said that the
      engineers asked for a bribe of fifty thousand roubles for bringing the
      line right up to the town, but the town council would only consent to give
      forty thousand; they could not come to an agreement over the difference,
      and now the townspeople regretted it, as they had to make a road to the
      station and that, it was reckoned, would cost more. The sleepers and rails
      had been laid throughout the whole length of the line, and trains ran up
      and down it, bringing building materials and labourers, and further
      progress was only delayed on account of the bridges which Dolzhikov was
      building, and some of the stations were not yet finished.
    

      Dubetchnya, as our first station was called, was a little under twelve
      miles from the town. I walked. The cornfields, bathed in the morning
      sunshine, were bright green. It was a flat, cheerful country, and in the
      distance there were the distinct outlines of the station, of ancient
      barrows, and far-away homesteads. . . . How nice it was out there in the
      open! And how I longed to be filled with the sense of freedom, if only for
      that one morning, that I might not think of what was being done in the
      town, not think of my needs, not feel hungry! Nothing has so marred my
      existence as an acute feeling of hunger, which made images of buckwheat
      porridge, rissoles, and baked fish mingle strangely with my best thoughts.
      Here I was standing alone in the open country, gazing upward at a lark
      which hovered in the air at the same spot, trilling as though in
      hysterics, and meanwhile I was thinking: "How nice it would be to eat a
      piece of bread and butter!"
    

      Or I would sit down by the roadside to rest, and shut my eyes to listen to
      the delicious sounds of May, and what haunted me was the smell of hot
      potatoes. Though I was tall and strongly built, I had as a rule little to
      eat, and so the predominant sensation throughout the day was hunger, and
      perhaps that was why I knew so well how it is that such multitudes of
      people toil merely for their daily bread, and can talk of nothing but
      things to eat.
    

      At Dubetchnya they were plastering the inside of the station, and building
      a wooden upper storey to the pumping shed. It was hot; there was a smell
      of lime, and the workmen sauntered listlessly between the heaps of
      shavings and mortar rubble. The pointsman lay asleep near his sentry box,
      and the sun was blazing full on his face. There was not a single tree. The
      telegraph wire hummed faintly and hawks were perching on it here and
      there. I, wandering, too, among the heaps of rubbish, and not knowing what
      to do, recalled how the engineer, in answer to my question what my duties
      would consist in, had said: "We shall see when you are there"; but what
      could one see in that wilderness?
    

      The plasterers spoke of the foreman, and of a certain Fyodot Vasilyev. I
      did not understand, and gradually I was overcome by depression-the
      physical depression in which one is conscious of one's arms and legs and
      huge body, and does not know what to do with them or where to put them.
    

      After I had been walking about for at least a couple of hours, I noticed
      that there were telegraph poles running off to the right from the station,
      and that they ended a mile or a mile and a half away at a white stone
      wall. The workmen told me the office was there, and at last I reflected
      that that was where I ought to go.
    

      It was a very old manor house, deserted long ago. The wall round it, of
      porous white stone, was mouldering and had fallen away in places, and the
      lodge, the blank wall of which looked out on the open country, had a rusty
      roof with patches of tin-plate gleaming here and there on it. Within the
      gates could be seen a spacious courtyard overgrown with rough weeds, and
      an old manor house with sunblinds on the windows, and a high roof red with
      rust. Two lodges, exactly alike, stood one on each side of the house to
      right and to left: one had its windows nailed up with boards; near the
      other, of which the windows were open, there was washing on the line, and
      there were calves moving about. The last of the telegraph poles stood in
      the courtyard, and the wire from it ran to the window of the lodge, of
      which the blank wall looked out into the open country. The door stood
      open; I went in. By the telegraph apparatus a gentleman with a curly dark
      head, wearing a reefer coat made of sailcloth, was sitting at a table; he
      glanced at me morosely from under his brows, but immediately smiled and
      said:
    

      "Hullo, Better-than-nothing!"
    

      It was Ivan Tcheprakov, an old schoolfellow of mine, who had been expelled
      from the second class for smoking. We used at one time, during autumn, to
      catch goldfinches, finches, and linnets together, and to sell them in the
      market early in the morning, while our parents were still in their beds.
      We watched for flocks of migrating starlings and shot at them with small
      shot, then we picked up those that were wounded, and some of them died in
      our hands in terrible agonies (I remember to this day how they moaned in
      the cage at night); those that recovered we sold, and swore with the
      utmost effrontery that they were all cocks. On one occasion at the market
      I had only one starling left, which I had offered to purchasers in vain,
      till at last I sold it for a farthing. "Anyway, it's better than nothing,"
      I said to comfort myself, as I put the farthing in my pocket, and from
      that day the street urchins and the schoolboys called after me:
      "Better-than-nothing"; and to this day the street boys and the shopkeepers
      mock at me with the nickname, though no one remembers how it arose.
    

      Tcheprakov was not of robust constitution: he was narrow-chested,
      round-shouldered, and long-legged. He wore a silk cord for a tie, had no
      trace of a waistcoat, and his boots were worse than mine, with the heels
      trodden down on one side. He stared, hardly even blinking, with a strained
      expression, as though he were just going to catch something, and he was
      always in a fuss.
    

      "You wait a minute," he would say fussily. "You listen. . . . Whatever was
      I talking about?"
    

      We got into conversation. I learned that the estate on which I now was had
      until recently been the property of the Tcheprakovs, and had only the
      autumn before passed into the possession of Dolzhikov, who considered it
      more profitable to put his money into land than to keep it in notes, and
      had already bought up three good-sized mortgaged estates in our
      neighbourhood. At the sale Tcheprakov's mother had reserved for herself
      the right to live for the next two years in one of the lodges at the side,
      and had obtained a post for her son in the office.
    

      "I should think he could buy!" Tcheprakov said of the engineer. "See what
      he fleeces out of the contractors alone! He fleeces everyone!"
    

      Then he took me to dinner, deciding fussily that I should live with him in
      the lodge, and have my meals from his mother.
    

      "She is a bit stingy," he said, "but she won't charge you much."
    

      It was very cramped in the little rooms in which his mother lived; they
      were all, even the passage and the entry, piled up with furniture which
      had been brought from the big house after the sale; and the furniture was
      all old-fashioned mahogany. Madame Tcheprakov, a very stout middle-aged
      lady with slanting Chinese eyes, was sitting in a big arm-chair by the
      window, knitting a stocking. She received me ceremoniously.
    

      "This is Poloznev, mamma," Tcheprakov introduced me. "He is going to serve
      here."
    

      "Are you a nobleman?" she asked in a strange, disagreeable voice: it
      seemed to me to sound as though fat were bubbling in her throat.
    

      "Yes," I answered.
    

      "Sit down."
    

      The dinner was a poor one. Nothing was served but pies filled with bitter
      curd, and milk soup. Elena Nikiforovna, who presided, kept blinking in a
      queer way, first with one eye and then with the other. She talked, she
      ate, but yet there was something deathly about her whole figure, and one
      almost fancied the faint smell of a corpse. There was only a glimmer of
      life in her, a glimmer of consciousness that she had been a lady who had
      once had her own serfs, that she was the widow of a general whom the
      servants had to address as "your Excellency"; and when these feeble relics
      of life flickered up in her for an instant she would say to her son:
    

      "Jean, you are not holding your knife properly!"
    

      Or she would say to me, drawing a deep breath, with the mincing air of a
      hostess trying to entertain a visitor:
    

      "You know we have sold our estate. Of course, it is a pity, we are used to
      the place, but Dolzhikov has promised to make Jean stationmaster of
      Dubetchnya, so we shall not have to go away; we shall live here at the
      station, and that is just the same as being on our own property! The
      engineer is so nice! Don't you think he is very handsome?"
    

      Until recently the Tcheprakovs had lived in a wealthy style, but since the
      death of the general everything had been changed. Elena Nikiforovna had
      taken to quarrelling with the neighbours, to going to law, and to not
      paying her bailiffs or her labourers; she was in constant terror of being
      robbed, and in some ten years Dubetchnya had become unrecognizable.
    

      Behind the great house was an old garden which had already run wild, and
      was overgrown with rough weeds and bushes. I walked up and down the
      verandah, which was still solid and beautiful; through the glass doors one
      could see a room with parquetted floor, probably the drawing-room; an
      old-fashioned piano and pictures in deep mahogany frames-there was nothing
      else. In the old flower-beds all that remained were peonies and poppies,
      which lifted their white and bright red heads above the grass. Young
      maples and elms, already nibbled by the cows, grew beside the paths, drawn
      up and hindering each other's growth. The garden was thickly overgrown and
      seemed impassable, but this was only near the house where there stood
      poplars, fir-trees, and old limetrees, all of the same age, relics of the
      former avenues. Further on, beyond them the garden had been cleared for
      the sake of hay, and here it was not moist and stuffy, and there were no
      spiders' webs in one's mouth and eyes. A light breeze was blowing. The
      further one went the more open it was, and here in the open space were
      cherries, plums, and spreading apple-trees, disfigured by props and by
      canker; and pear-trees so tall that one could not believe they were
      pear-trees. This part of the garden was let to some shopkeepers of the
      town, and it was protected from thieves and starlings by a feeble-minded
      peasant who lived in a shanty in it.
    

      The garden, growing more and more open, till it became definitely a
      meadow, sloped down to the river, which was overgrown with green weeds and
      osiers. Near the milldam was the millpond, deep and full of fish; a little
      mill with a thatched roof was working away with a wrathful sound, and
      frogs croaked furiously. Circles passed from time to time over the smooth,
      mirror-like water, and the water-lilies trembled, stirred by the lively
      fish. On the further side of the river was the little village Dubetchnya.
      The still, blue millpond was alluring with its promise of coolness and
      peace. And now all this-the millpond and the mill and the snug-looking
      banks-belonged to the engineer!
    

      And so my new work began. I received and forwarded telegrams, wrote
      various reports, and made fair copies of the notes of requirements, the
      complaints, and the reports sent to the office by the illiterate foremen
      and workmen. But for the greater part of the day I did nothing but walk
      about the room waiting for telegrams, or made a boy sit in the lodge while
      I went for a walk in the garden, until the boy ran to tell me that there
      was a tapping at the operating machine. I had dinner at Madame
      Tcheprakov's. Meat we had very rarely: our dishes were all made of milk,
      and Wednesdays and Fridays were fast days, and on those days we had pink
      plates which were called Lenten plates. Madame Tcheprakov was continually
      blinking-it was her invariable habit, and I always felt ill at ease in her
      presence.
    

      As there was not enough work in the lodge for one, Tcheprakov did nothing,
      but simply dozed, or went with his gun to shoot ducks on the millpond. In
      the evenings he drank too much in the village or the station, and before
      going to bed stared in the looking-glass and said: "Hullo, Ivan
      Tcheprakov."
    

      When he was drunk he was very pale, and kept rubbing his hands and
      laughing with a sound like a neigh: "hee-hee-hee!" By way of bravado he
      used to strip and run about the country naked. He used to eat flies and
      say they were rather sour.
    

      IV
    

      One day, after dinner, he ran breathless into the lodge and said: "Go
      along, your sister has come."
    

      I went out, and there I found a hired brake from the town standing before
      the entrance of the great house. My sister had come in it with Anyuta
      Blagovo and a gentleman in a military tunic. Going up closer I recognized
      the latter: it was the brother of Anyuta Blagovo, the army doctor.
    

      "We have come to you for a picnic," he said; "is that all right?"
    

      My sister and Anyuta wanted to ask how I was getting on here, but both
      were silent, and simply gazed at me. I was silent too. They saw that I did
      not like the place, and tears came into my sister's eyes, while Anyuta
      Blagovo turned crimson.
    

      We went into the garden. The doctor walked ahead of us all and said
      enthusiastically:
    

      "What air! Holy Mother, what air!"
    

      In appearance he was still a student. And he walked and talked like a
      student, and the expression of his grey eyes was as keen, honest, and
      frank as a nice student's. Beside his tall and handsome sister he looked
      frail and thin; and his beard was thin too, and his voice, too, was a thin
      but rather agreeable tenor. He was serving in a regiment somewhere, and
      had come home to his people for a holiday, and said he was going in the
      autumn to Petersburg for his examination as a doctor of medicine. He was
      already a family man, with a wife and three children, he had married very
      young, in his second year at the University, and now people in the town
      said he was unhappy in his family life and was not living with his wife.
    

      "What time is it?" my sister asked uneasily. "We must get back in good
      time. Papa let me come to see my brother on condition I was back at six."
    

      "Oh, bother your papa!" sighed the doctor.
    

      I set the samovar. We put down a carpet before the verandah of the great
      house and had our tea there, and the doctor knelt down, drank out of his
      saucer, and declared that he now knew what bliss was. Then Tcheprakov came
      with the key and opened the glass door, and we all went into the house.
      There it was half dark and mysterious, and smelt of mushrooms, and our
      footsteps had a hollow sound as though there were cellars under the floor.
      The doctor stopped and touched the keys of the piano, and it responded
      faintly with a husky, quivering, but melodious chord; he tried his voice
      and sang a song, frowning and tapping impatiently with his foot when some
      note was mute. My sister did not talk about going home, but walked about
      the rooms and kept saying:
    

      "How happy I am! How happy I am!"
    

      There was a note of astonishment in her voice, as though it seemed to her
      incredible that she, too, could feel light-hearted. It was the first time
      in my life I had seen her so happy. She actually looked prettier. In
      profile she did not look nice; her nose and mouth seemed to stick out and
      had an expression as though she were pouting, but she had beautiful dark
      eyes, a pale, very delicate complexion, and a touching expression of
      goodness and melancholy, and when she talked she seemed charming and even
      beautiful. We both, she and I, took after our mother, were broad
      shouldered, strongly built, and capable of endurance, but her pallor was a
      sign of ill-health; she often had a cough, and I sometimes caught in her
      face that look one sees in people who are seriously ill, but for some
      reason conceal the fact. There was something naÃ¯ve and childish in her
      gaiety now, as though the joy that had been suppressed and smothered in
      our childhood by harsh education had now suddenly awakened in her soul and
      found a free outlet.
    

      But when evening came on and the horses were brought round, my sister sank
      into silence and looked thin and shrunken, and she got into the brake as
      though she were going to the scaffold.
    

      When they had all gone, and the sound had died away . . . I remembered
      that Anyuta Blagovo had not said a word to me all day.
    

      "She is a wonderful girl!" I thought. "Wonderful girl!"
    

      St. Peter's fast came, and we had nothing but Lenten dishes every day. I
      was weighed down by physical depression due to idleness and my unsettled
      position, and dissatisfied with myself. Listless and hungry, I lounged
      about the garden and only waited for a suitable mood to go away.
    

      Towards evening one day, when Radish was sitting in the lodge, Dolzhikov,
      very sunburnt and grey with dust, walked in unexpectedly. He had been
      spending three days on his land, and had come now to Dubetchnya by the
      steamer, and walked to us from the station. While waiting for the
      carriage, which was to come for him from the town, he walked round the
      grounds with his bailiff, giving orders in a loud voice, then sat for a
      whole hour in our lodge, writing letters. While he was there telegrams
      came for him, and he himself tapped off the answers. We three stood in
      silence at attention.
    

      "What a muddle!" he said, glancing contemptuously at a record book. "In a
      fortnight I am transferring the office to the station, and I don't know
      what I am to do with you, my friends."
    

      "I do my best, your honour," said Tcheprakov.
    

      "To be sure, I see how you do your best. The only thing you can do is to
      take your salary," the engineer went on, looking at me; "you keep relying
      on patronage to faire le carriÃ¨re as quickly and as easily as
      possible. Well, I don't care for patronage. No one took any trouble on my
      behalf. Before they gave me a railway contract I went about as a mechanic
      and worked in Belgium as an oiler. And you, Panteley, what are you doing
      here?" he asked, turning to Radish. "Drinking with them?"
    

      He, for some reason, always called humble people Panteley, and such as me
      and Tcheprakov he despised, and called them drunkards, beasts, and rabble
      to their faces. Altogether he was cruel to humble subordinates, and used
      to fine them and turn them off coldly without explanations.
    

      At last the horses came for him. As he said good-bye he promised to turn
      us all off in a fortnight; he called his bailiff a blockhead; and then,
      lolling at ease in his carriage, drove back to the town.
    

      "Andrey Ivanitch," I said to Radish, "take me on as a workman."
    

      "Oh, all right!"
    

      And we set off together in the direction of the town. When the station and
      the big house with its buildings were left behind I asked: "Andrey
      Ivanitch, why did you come to Dubetchnya this evening?"
    

      "In the first place my fellows are working on the line, and in the second
      place I came to pay the general's lady my interest. Last year I borrowed
      fifty roubles from her, and I pay her now a rouble a month interest."
    

      The painter stopped and took me by the button.
    

      "Misail Alexeyitch, our angel," he went on. "The way I look at it is that
      if any man, gentle or simple, takes even the smallest interest, he is
      doing evil. There cannot be truth and justice in such a man."
    

      Radish, lean, pale, dreadful-looking, shut his eyes, shook his head, and,
      in the tone of a philosopher, pronounced:
    

      "Lice consume the grass, rust consumes the iron, and lying the soul. Lord,
      have mercy upon us sinners."
    

      V
    

      Radish was not practical, and was not at all good at forming an estimate;
      he took more work than he could get through, and when calculating he was
      agitated, lost his head, and so was almost always out of pocket over his
      jobs. He undertook painting, glazing, paperhanging, and even tiling roofs,
      and I can remember his running about for three days to find tilers for the
      sake of a paltry job. He was a first-rate workman; he sometimes earned as
      much as ten roubles a day; and if it had not been for the desire at all
      costs to be a master, and to be called a contractor, he would probably
      have had plenty of money.
    

      He was paid by the job, but he paid me and the other workmen by the day,
      from one and twopence to two shillings a day. When it was fine and dry we
      did all kinds of outside work, chiefly painting roofs. When I was new to
      the work it made my feet burn as though I were walking on hot bricks, and
      when I put on felt boots they were hotter than ever. But this was only at
      first; later on I got used to it, and everything went swimmingly. I was
      living now among people to whom labour was obligatory, inevitable, and who
      worked like cart-horses, often with no idea of the moral significance of
      labour, and, indeed, never using the word "labour" in conversation at all.
      Beside them I, too, felt like a cart-horse, growing more and more imbued
      with the feeling of the obligatory and inevitable character of what I was
      doing, and this made my life easier, setting me free from all doubt and
      uncertainty.
    

      At first everything interested me, everything was new, as though I had
      been born again. I could sleep on the ground and go about barefoot, and
      that was extremely pleasant; I could stand in a crowd of the common people
      and be no constraint to anyone, and when a cab horse fell down in the
      street I ran to help it up without being afraid of soiling my clothes. And
      the best of it all was, I was living on my own account and no burden to
      anyone!
    

      Painting roofs, especially with our own oil and colours, was regarded as a
      particularly profitable job, and so this rough, dull work was not
      disdained, even by such good workmen as Radish. In short breeches, and
      wasted, purple-looking legs, he used to go about the roofs, looking like a
      stork, and I used to hear him, as he plied his brush, breathing heavily
      and saying: "Woe, woe to us sinners!"
    

      He walked about the roofs as freely as though he were upon the ground. In
      spite of his being ill and pale as a corpse, his agility was
      extraordinary: he used to paint the domes and cupolas of the churches
      without scaffolding, like a young man, with only the help of a ladder and
      a rope, and it was rather horrible when standing on a height far from the
      earth; he would draw himself up erect, and for some unknown reason
      pronounce:
    

      "Lice consume grass, rust consumes iron, and lying the soul!"
    

      Or, thinking about something, would answer his thoughts aloud:
    

      "Anything may happen! Anything may happen!"
    

      When I went home from my work, all the people who were sitting on benches
      by the gates, all the shopmen and boys and their employers, made sneering
      and spiteful remarks after me, and this upset me at first and seemed to be
      simply monstrous.
    

      "Better-than-nothing!" I heard on all sides. "House painter! Yellow
      ochre!"
    

      And none behaved so ungraciously to me as those who had only lately been
      humble people themselves, and had earned their bread by hard manual
      labour. In the streets full of shops I was once passing an ironmonger's
      when water was thrown over me as though by accident, and on one occasion
      someone darted out with a stick at me, while a fishmonger, a grey-headed
      old man, barred my way and said, looking at me angrily:
    

      "I am not sorry for you, you fool! It's your father I am sorry for."
    

      And my acquaintances were for some reason overcome with embarrassment when
      they met me. Some of them looked upon me as a queer fish and a comic fool;
      others were sorry for me; others did not know what attitude to take up to
      me, and it was difficult to make them out. One day I met Anyuta Blagovo in
      a side street near Great Dvoryansky Street. I was going to work, and was
      carrying two long brushes and a pail of paint. Recognizing me Anyuta
      flushed crimson.
    

      "Please do not bow to me in the street," she said nervously, harshly, and
      in a shaking voice, without offering me her hand, and tears suddenly
      gleamed in her eyes. "If to your mind all this is necessary, so be it . .
      . so be it, but I beg you not to meet me!"
    

      I no longer lived in Great Dvoryansky Street, but in the suburb with my
      old nurse Karpovna, a good-natured but gloomy old woman, who always
      foreboded some harm, was afraid of all dreams, and even in the bees and
      wasps that flew into her room saw omens of evil, and the fact that I had
      become a workman, to her thinking, boded nothing good.
    

      "Your life is ruined," she would say, mournfully shaking her head,
      "ruined."
    

      Her adopted son Prokofy, a huge, uncouth, red-headed fellow of thirty,
      with bristling moustaches, a butcher by trade, lived in the little house
      with her. When he met me in the passage he would make way for me in
      respectful silence, and if he was drunk he would salute me with all five
      fingers at once. He used to have supper in the evening, and through the
      partition wall of boards I could hear him clear his throat and sigh as he
      drank off glass after glass.
    

      "Mamma," he would call in an undertone.
    

      "Well," Karpovna, who was passionately devoted to her adopted son, would
      respond: "What is it, sonny?"
    

      "I can show you a testimony of my affection, mamma. All this earthly life
      I will cherish you in your declining years in this vale of tears, and when
      you die I will bury you at my expense; I have said it, and you can believe
      it."
    

      I got up every morning before sunrise, and went to bed early. We house
      painters ate a great deal and slept soundly; the only thing amiss was that
      my heart used to beat violently at night. I did not quarrel with my mates.
      Violent abuse, desperate oaths, and wishes such as, "Blast your eyes," or
      "Cholera take you," never ceased all day, but, nevertheless, we lived on
      very friendly terms. The other fellows suspected me of being some sort of
      religious sectary, and made good-natured jokes at my expense, saying that
      even my own father had disowned me, and thereupon would add that they
      rarely went into the temple of God themselves, and that many of them had
      not been to confession for ten years. They justified this laxity on their
      part by saying that a painter among men was like a jackdaw among birds.
    

      The men had a good opinion of me, and treated me with respect; it was
      evident that my not drinking, not smoking, but leading a quiet, steady
      life pleased them very much. It was only an unpleasant shock to them that
      I took no hand in stealing oil and did not go with them to ask for tips
      from people on whose property we were working. Stealing oil and paints
      from those who employed them was a house painter's custom, and was not
      regarded as theft, and it was remarkable that even so upright a man as
      Radish would always carry away a little white lead and oil as he went home
      from work. And even the most respectable old fellows, who owned the houses
      in which they lived in the suburb, were not ashamed to ask for a tip, and
      it made me feel vexed and ashamed to see the men go in a body to
      congratulate some nonentity on the commencement or the completion of the
      job, and thank him with degrading servility when they had received a few
      coppers.
    

      With people on whose work they were engaged they behaved like wily
      courtiers, and almost every day I was reminded of Shakespeare's Polonius.
    

      "I fancy it is going to rain," the man whose house was being painted would
      say, looking at the sky.
    

      "It is, there is not a doubt it is," the painters would agree.
    

      "I don't think it is a rain-cloud, though. Perhaps it won't rain after
      all."
    

      "No, it won't, your honour! I am sure it won't."
    

      But their attitude to their patrons behind their backs was usually one of
      irony, and when they saw, for instance, a gentleman sitting in the
      verandah reading a newspaper, they would observe:
    

      "He reads the paper, but I daresay he has nothing to eat."
    

      I never went home to see my own people. When I came back from work I often
      found waiting for me little notes, brief and anxious, in which my sister
      wrote to me about my father; that he had been particularly preoccupied at
      dinner and had eaten nothing, or that he had been giddy and staggering, or
      that he had locked himself in his room and had not come out for a long
      time. Such items of news troubled me; I could not sleep, and at times even
      walked up and down Great Dvoryansky Street at night by our house, looking
      in at the dark windows and trying to guess whether everything was well at
      home. On Sundays my sister came to see me, but came in secret, as though
      it were not to see me but our nurse. And if she came in to see me she was
      very pale, with tear-stained eyes, and she began crying at once.
    

      "Our father will never live through this," she would say. "If anything
      should happen to him-God grant it may not-your conscience will torment you
      all your life. It's awful, Misail; for our mother's sake I beseech you:
      reform your ways."
    

      "My darling sister," I would say, "how can I reform my ways if I am
      convinced that I am acting in accordance with my conscience? Do
      understand!"
    

      "I know you are acting on your conscience, but perhaps it could be done
      differently, somehow, so as not to wound anybody."
    

      "Ah, holy Saints!" the old woman sighed through the door. "Your life is
      ruined! There will be trouble, my dears, there will be trouble!"
    

      VI
    

      One Sunday Dr. Blagovo turned up unexpectedly. He was wearing a military
      tunic over a silk shirt and high boots of patent leather.
    

      "I have come to see you," he began, shaking my hand heartily like a
      student. "I am hearing about you every day, and I have been meaning to
      come and have a heart-to-heart talk, as they say. The boredom in the town
      is awful, there is not a living soul, no one to say a word to. It's hot,
      Holy Mother," he went on, taking off his tunic and sitting in his silk
      shirt. "My dear fellow, let me talk to you."
    

      I was dull myself, and had for a long time been craving for the society of
      someone not a house painter. I was genuinely glad to see him.
    

      "I'll begin by saying," he said, sitting down on my bed, "that I
      sympathize with you from the bottom of my heart, and deeply respect the
      life you are leading. They don't understand you here in the town, and,
      indeed, there is no one to understand, seeing that, as you know, they are
      all, with very few exceptions, regular Gogolesque pig faces here. But I
      saw what you were at once that time at the picnic. You are a noble soul,
      an honest, high-minded man! I respect you, and feel it a great honour to
      shake hands with you!" he went on enthusiastically. "To have made such a
      complete and violent change of life as you have done, you must have passed
      through a complicated spiritual crisis, and to continue this manner of
      life now, and to keep up to the high standard of your convictions
      continually, must be a strain on your mind and heart from day to day. Now
      to begin our talk, tell me, don't you consider that if you had spent your
      strength of will, this strained activity, all these powers on something
      else, for instance, on gradually becoming a great scientist, or artist,
      your life would have been broader and deeper and would have been more
      productive?"
    

      We talked, and when we got upon manual labour I expressed this idea: that
      what is wanted is that the strong should not enslave the weak, that the
      minority should not be a parasite on the majority, nor a vampire for ever
      sucking its vital sap; that is, all, without exception, strong and weak,
      rich and poor, should take part equally in the struggle for existence,
      each one on his own account, and that there was no better means for
      equalizing things in that way than manual labour, in the form of universal
      service, compulsory for all.
    

      "Then do you think everyone without exception ought to engage in manual
      labour?" asked the doctor.
    

      "Yes."
    

      "And don't you think that if everyone, including the best men, the
      thinkers and great scientists, taking part in the struggle for existence,
      each on his own account, are going to waste their time breaking stones and
      painting roofs, may not that threaten a grave danger to progress?"
    

      "Where is the danger?" I asked. "Why, progress is in deeds of love, in
      fulfilling the moral law; if you don't enslave anyone, if you don't
      oppress anyone, what further progress do you want?"
    

      "But, excuse me," Blagovo suddenly fired up, rising to his feet. "But,
      excuse me! If a snail in its shell busies itself over perfecting its own
      personality and muddles about with the moral law, do you call that
      progress?"
    

      "Why muddles?" I said, offended. "If you don't force your neighbour to
      feed and clothe you, to transport you from place to place and defend you
      from your enemies, surely in the midst of a life entirely resting on
      slavery, that is progress, isn't it? To my mind it is the most important
      progress, and perhaps the only one possible and necessary for man."
    

      "The limits of universal world progress are in infinity, and to talk of
      some 'possible' progress limited by our needs and temporary theories is,
      excuse my saying so, positively strange."
    

      "If the limits of progress are in infinity as you say, it follows that its
      aims are not definite," I said. "To live without knowing definitely what
      you are living for!"
    

      "So be it! But that 'not knowing' is not so dull as your 'knowing.' I am
      going up a ladder which is called progress, civilization, culture; I go on
      and up without knowing definitely where I am going, but really it is worth
      living for the sake of that delightful ladder; while you know what you are
      living for, you live for the sake of some people's not enslaving others,
      that the artist and the man who rubs his paints may dine equally well. But
      you know that's the petty, bourgeois, kitchen, grey side of life, and
      surely it is revolting to live for that alone? If some insects do enslave
      others, bother them, let them devour each other! We need not think about
      them. You know they will die and decay just the same, however zealously
      you rescue them from slavery. We must think of that great millennium which
      awaits humanity in the remote future."
    

      Blagovo argued warmly with me, but at the same time one could see he was
      troubled by some irrelevant idea.
    

      "I suppose your sister is not coming?" he said, looking at his watch. "She
      was at our house yesterday, and said she would be seeing you to-day. You
      keep saying slavery, slavery . . ." he went on. "But you know that is a
      special question, and all such questions are solved by humanity
      gradually."
    

      We began talking of doing things gradually. I said that "the question of
      doing good or evil every one settles for himself, without waiting till
      humanity settles it by the way of gradual development. Moreover, this
      gradual process has more than one aspect. Side by side with the gradual
      development of human ideas the gradual growth of ideas of another order is
      observed. Serfdom is no more, but the capitalist system is growing. And in
      the very heyday of emancipating ideas, just as in the days of Baty, the
      majority feeds, clothes, and defends the minority while remaining hungry,
      inadequately clad, and defenceless. Such an order of things can be made to
      fit in finely with any tendencies and currents of thought you like,
      because the art of enslaving is also gradually being cultivated. We no
      longer flog our servants in the stable, but we give to slavery refined
      forms, at least, we succeed in finding a justification for it in each
      particular case. Ideas are ideas with us, but if now, at the end of the
      nineteenth century, it were possible to lay the burden of the most
      unpleasant of our physiological functions upon the working class, we
      should certainly do so, and afterwards, of course, justify ourselves by
      saying that if the best people, the thinkers and great scientists, were to
      waste their precious time on these functions, progress might be menaced
      with great danger."
    

      But at this point my sister arrived. Seeing the doctor she was fluttered
      and troubled, and began saying immediately that it was time for her to go
      home to her father.
    

      "Kleopatra Alexyevna," said Blagovo earnestly, pressing both hands to his
      heart, "what will happen to your father if you spend half an hour or so
      with your brother and me?"
    

      He was frank, and knew how to communicate his liveliness to others. After
      a moment's thought, my sister laughed, and all at once became suddenly gay
      as she had been at the picnic. We went out into the country, and lying in
      the grass went on with our talk, and looked towards the town where all the
      windows facing west were like glittering gold because the sun was setting.
    

      After that, whenever my sister was coming to see me Blagovo turned up too,
      and they always greeted each other as though their meeting in my room was
      accidental. My sister listened while the doctor and I argued, and at such
      times her expression was joyfully enthusiastic, full of tenderness and
      curiosity, and it seemed to me that a new world she had never dreamed of
      before, and which she was now striving to fathom, was gradually opening
      before her eyes. When the doctor was not there she was quiet and sad, and
      now if she sometimes shed tears as she sat on my bed it was for reasons of
      which she did not speak.
    

      In August Radish ordered us to be ready to go to the railway-line. Two
      days before we were "banished" from the town my father came to see me. He
      sat down and in a leisurely way, without looking at me, wiped his red
      face, then took out of his pocket our town Messenger, and
      deliberately, with emphasis on each word, read out the news that the son
      of the branch manager of the State Bank, a young man of my age, had been
      appointed head of a Department in the Exchequer.
    

      "And now look at you," he said, folding up the newspaper, "a beggar, in
      rags, good for nothing! Even working-class people and peasants obtain
      education in order to become men, while you, a Poloznev, with ancestors of
      rank and distinction, aspire to the gutter! But I have not come here to
      talk to you; I have washed my hands of you-" he added in a stifled voice,
      getting up. "I have come to find out where your sister is, you worthless
      fellow. She left home after dinner, and here it is nearly eight and she is
      not back. She has taken to going out frequently without telling me; she is
      less dutiful-and I see in it your evil and degrading influence. Where is
      she?"
    

      In his hand he had the umbrella I knew so well, and I was already
      flustered and drew myself up like a schoolboy, expecting my father to
      begin hitting me with it, but he noticed my glance at the umbrella and
      most likely that restrained him.
    

      "Live as you please!" he said. "I shall not give you my blessing!"
    

      "Holy Saints!" my nurse muttered behind the door. "You poor, unlucky
      child! Ah, my heart bodes ill!"
    

      I worked on the railway-line. It rained without stopping all August; it
      was damp and cold; they had not carried the corn in the fields, and on big
      farms where the wheat had been cut by machines it lay not in sheaves but
      in heaps, and I remember how those luckless heaps of wheat turned blacker
      every day and the grain was sprouting in them. It was hard to work; the
      pouring rain spoiled everything we managed to do. We were not allowed to
      live or to sleep in the railway buildings, and we took refuge in the damp
      and filthy mud huts in which the navvies had lived during the summer, and
      I could not sleep at night for the cold and the woodlice crawling on my
      face and hands. And when we worked near the bridges the navvies used to
      come in the evenings in a gang, simply in order to beat the painters-it
      was a form of sport to them. They used to beat us, to steal our brushes.
      And to annoy us and rouse us to fight they used to spoil our work; they
      would, for instance, smear over the signal boxes with green paint. To
      complete our troubles, Radish took to paying us very irregularly. All the
      painting work on the line was given out to a contractor; he gave it out to
      another; and this subcontractor gave it to Radish after subtracting twenty
      per cent. for himself. The job was not a profitable one in itself, and the
      rain made it worse; time was wasted; we could not work while Radish was
      obliged to pay the fellows by the day. The hungry painters almost came to
      beating him, called him a cheat, a blood-sucker, a Judas, while he, poor
      fellow, sighed, lifted up his hand to Heaven in despair, and was
      continually going to Madame Tcheprakov for money.
    

      VII
    

      Autumn came on, rainy, dark, and muddy. The season of unemployment set in,
      and I used to sit at home out of work for three days at a stretch, or did
      various little jobs, not in the painting line. For instance, I wheeled
      earth, earning about fourpence a day by it. Dr. Blagovo had gone away to
      Petersburg. My sister had given up coming to see me. Radish was laid up at
      home ill, expecting death from day to day.
    

      And my mood was autumnal too. Perhaps because, having become a workman, I
      saw our town life only from the seamy side, it was my lot almost every day
      to make discoveries which reduced me almost to despair. Those of my
      fellow-citizens, about whom I had no opinion before, or who had externally
      appeared perfectly decent, turned out now to be base, cruel people,
      capable of any dirty action. We common people were deceived, cheated, and
      kept waiting for hours together in the cold entry or the kitchen; we were
      insulted and treated with the utmost rudeness. In the autumn I papered the
      reading-room and two other rooms at the club; I was paid a penny
      three-farthings the piece, but had to sign a receipt at the rate of
      twopence halfpenny, and when I refused to do so, a gentleman of benevolent
      appearance in gold-rimmed spectacles, who must have been one of the club
      committee, said to me:
    

      "If you say much more, you blackguard, I'll pound your face into a jelly!"
    

      And when the flunkey whispered to him what I was, the son of Poloznev the
      architect, he became embarrassed, turned crimson, but immediately
      recovered himself and said: "Devil take him."
    

      In the shops they palmed off on us workmen putrid meat, musty flour, and
      tea that had been used and dried again; the police hustled us in church,
      the assistants and nurses in the hospital plundered us, and if we were too
      poor to give them a bribe they revenged themselves by bringing us food in
      dirty vessels. In the post-office the pettiest official considered he had
      a right to treat us like animals, and to shout with coarse insolence: "You
      wait!" "Where are you shoving to?" Even the housedogs were unfriendly to
      us, and fell upon us with peculiar viciousness. But the thing that struck
      me most of all in my new position was the complete lack of justice, what
      is defined by the peasants in the words: "They have forgotten God." Rarely
      did a day pass without swindling. We were swindled by the merchants who
      sold us oil, by the contractors and the workmen and the people who
      employed us. I need not say that there could never be a question of our
      rights, and we always had to ask for the money we earned as though it were
      a charity, and to stand waiting for it at the back door, cap in hand.
    

      I was papering a room at the club next to the reading-room; in the
      evening, when I was just getting ready to go, the daughter of Dolzhikov,
      the engineer, walked into the room with a bundle of books under her arm.
    

      I bowed to her.
    

      "Oh, how do you do!" she said, recognizing me at once, and holding out her
      hand. "I'm very glad to see you."
    

      She smiled and looked with curiosity and wonder at my smock, my pail of
      paste, the paper stretched on the floor; I was embarrassed, and she, too,
      felt awkward.
    

      "You must excuse my looking at you like this," she said. "I have been told
      so much about you. Especially by Dr. Blagovo; he is simply in love with
      you. And I have made the acquaintance of your sister too; a sweet, dear
      girl, but I can never persuade her that there is nothing awful about your
      adopting the simple life. On the contrary, you have become the most
      interesting man in the town."
    

      She looked again at the pail of paste and the wallpaper, and went on:
    

      "I asked Dr. Blagovo to make me better acquainted with you, but apparently
      he forgot, or had not time. Anyway, we are acquainted all the same, and if
      you would come and see me quite simply I should be extremely indebted to
      you. I so long to have a talk. I am a simple person," she added, holding
      out her hand to me, "and I hope that you will feel no constraint with me.
      My father is not here, he is in Petersburg."
    

      She went off into the reading-room, rustling her skirts, while I went
      home, and for a long time could not get to sleep.
    

      That cheerless autumn some kind soul, evidently wishing to alleviate my
      existence, sent me from time to time tea and lemons, or biscuits, or roast
      game. Karpovna told me that they were always brought by a soldier, and
      from whom they came she did not know; and the soldier used to enquire
      whether I was well, and whether I dined every day, and whether I had warm
      clothing. When the frosts began I was presented in the same way in my
      absence with a soft knitted scarf brought by the soldier. There was a
      faint elusive smell of scent about it, and I guessed who my good fairy
      was. The scarf smelt of lilies-of-the-valley, the favourite scent of
      Anyuta Blagovo.
    

      Towards winter there was more work and it was more cheerful. Radish
      recovered, and we worked together in the cemetery church, where we were
      putting the ground-work on the ikon-stand before gilding. It was a clean,
      quiet job, and, as our fellows used to say, profitable. One could get
      through a lot of work in a day, and the time passed quickly,
      imperceptibly. There was no swearing, no laughter, no loud talk. The place
      itself compelled one to quietness and decent behaviour, and disposed one
      to quiet, serious thoughts. Absorbed in our work we stood or sat
      motionless like statues; there was a deathly silence in keeping with the
      cemetery, so that if a tool fell, or a flame spluttered in the lamp, the
      noise of such sounds rang out abrupt and resonant, and made us look round.
      After a long silence we would hear a buzzing like the swarming of bees: it
      was the requiem of a baby being chanted slowly in subdued voices in the
      porch; or an artist, painting a dove with stars round it on a cupola would
      begin softly whistling, and recollecting himself with a start would at
      once relapse into silence; or Radish, answering his thoughts, would say
      with a sigh: "Anything is possible! Anything is possible!" or a slow
      disconsolate bell would begin ringing over our heads, and the painters
      would observe that it must be for the funeral of some wealthy person. . .
      .
    

      My days I spent in this stillness in the twilight of the church, and in
      the long evenings I played billiards or went to the theatre in the gallery
      wearing the new trousers I had bought out of my own earnings. Concerts and
      performances had already begun at the Azhogins'; Radish used to paint the
      scenes alone now. He used to tell me the plot of the plays and describe
      the tableaux vivants which he witnessed. I listened to him with
      envy. I felt greatly drawn to the rehearsals, but I could not bring myself
      to go to the Azhogins'.
    

      A week before Christmas Dr. Blagovo arrived. And again we argued and
      played billiards in the evenings. When he played he used to take off his
      coat and unbutton his shirt over his chest, and for some reason tried
      altogether to assume the air of a desperate rake. He did not drink much,
      but made a great uproar about it, and had a special faculty for getting
      through twenty roubles in an evening at such a poor cheap tavern as the Volga.
    

      My sister began coming to see me again; they both expressed surprise every
      time on seeing each other, but from her joyful, guilty face it was evident
      that these meetings were not accidental. One evening, when we were playing
      billiards, the doctor said to me:
    

      "I say, why don't you go and see Miss Dolzhikov? You don't know Mariya
      Viktorovna; she is a clever creature, a charmer, a simple, good-natured
      soul."
    

      I described how her father had received me in the spring.
    

      "Nonsense!" laughed the doctor, "the engineer's one thing and she's
      another. Really, my dear fellow, you mustn't be nasty to her; go and see
      her sometimes. For instance, let's go and see her tomorrow evening. What
      do you say?"
    

      He persuaded me. The next evening I put on my new serge trousers, and in
      some agitation I set off to Miss Dolzhikov's. The footman did not seem so
      haughty and terrible, nor the furniture so gorgeous, as on that morning
      when I had come to ask a favour. Mariya Viktorovna was expecting me, and
      she received me like an old acquaintance, shaking hands with me in a
      friendly way. She was wearing a grey cloth dress with full sleeves, and
      had her hair done in the style which we used to call "dogs' ears," when it
      came into fashion in the town a year before. The hair was combed down over
      the ears, and this made Mariya Viktorovna's face look broader, and she
      seemed to me this time very much like her father, whose face was broad and
      red, with something in its expression like a sledge-driver. She was
      handsome and elegant, but not youthful looking; she looked thirty, though
      in reality she was not more than twenty-five.
    

      "Dear Doctor, how grateful I am to you," she said, making me sit down. "If
      it hadn't been for him you wouldn't have come to see me. I am bored to
      death! My father has gone away and left me alone, and I don't know what to
      do with myself in this town."
    

      Then she began asking me where I was working now, how much I earned, where
      I lived.
    

      "Do you spend on yourself nothing but what you earn?" she asked.
    

      "No."
    

      "Happy man!" she sighed. "All the evil in life, it seems to me, comes from
      idleness, boredom, and spiritual emptiness, and all this is inevitable
      when one is accustomed to living at other people's expense. Don't think I
      am showing off, I tell you truthfully: it is not interesting or pleasant
      to be rich. 'Make to yourselves friends of the mammon of unrighteousness'
      is said, because there is not and cannot be a mammon that's righteous."
    

      She looked round at the furniture with a grave, cold expression, as though
      she wanted to count it over, and went on:
    

      "Comfort and luxury have a magical power; little by little they draw into
      their clutches even strong-willed people. At one time father and I lived
      simply, not in a rich style, but now you see how! It is something
      monstrous," she said, shrugging her shoulders; "we spend up to twenty
      thousand a year! In the provinces!"
    

      "One comes to look at comfort and luxury as the invariable privilege of
      capital and education," I said, "and it seems to me that the comforts of
      life may be combined with any sort of labour, even the hardest and
      dirtiest. Your father is rich, and yet he says himself that it has been
      his lot to be a mechanic and an oiler."
    

      She smiled and shook her head doubtfully: "My father sometimes eats bread
      dipped in kvass," she said. "It's a fancy, a whim!"
    

      At that moment there was a ring and she got up.
    

      "The rich and well-educated ought to work like everyone else," she said,
      "and if there is comfort it ought to be equal for all. There ought not to
      be any privileges. But that's enough philosophizing. Tell me something
      amusing. Tell me about the painters. What are they like? Funny?"
    

      The doctor came in; I began telling them about the painters, but, being
      unaccustomed to talking, I was constrained, and described them like an
      ethnologist, gravely and tediously. The doctor, too, told us some
      anecdotes of working men: he staggered about, shed tears, dropped on his
      knees, and, even, mimicking a drunkard, lay on the floor; it was as good
      as a play, and Mariya Viktorovna laughed till she cried as she looked at
      him. Then he played on the piano and sang in his thin, pleasant tenor,
      while Mariya Viktorovna stood by and picked out what he was to sing, and
      corrected him when he made a mistake.
    

      "I've heard that you sing, too?" I enquired.
    

      "Sing, too!" cried the doctor in horror. "She sings exquisitely, a perfect
      artist, and you talk of her 'singing too'! What an idea!"
    

      "I did study in earnest at one time," she said, answering my question,
      "but now I have given it up."
    

      Sitting on a low stool she told us of her life in Petersburg, and mimicked
      some celebrated singers, imitating their voice and manner of singing. She
      made a sketch of the doctor in her album, then of me; she did not draw
      well, but both the portraits were like us. She laughed, and was full of
      mischief and charming grimaces, and this suited her better than talking
      about the mammon of unrighteousness, and it seemed to me that she had been
      talking just before about wealth and luxury, not in earnest, but in
      imitation of someone. She was a superb comic actress. I mentally compared
      her with our young ladies, and even the handsome, dignified Anyuta Blagovo
      could not stand comparison with her; the difference was immense, like the
      difference between a beautiful, cultivated rose and a wild briar.
    

      We had supper together, the three of us. The doctor and Mariya Viktorovna
      drank red wine, champagne, and coffee with brandy in it; they clinked
      glasses and drank to friendship, to enlightenment, to progress, to
      liberty, and they did not get drunk but only flushed, and were
      continually, for no reason, laughing till they cried. So as not to be
      tiresome I drank claret too.
    

      "Talented, richly endowed natures," said Miss Dolzhikov, "know how to
      live, and go their own way; mediocre people, like myself for instance,
      know nothing and can do nothing of themselves; there is nothing left for
      them but to discern some deep social movement, and to float where they are
      carried by it."
    

      "How can one discern what doesn't exist?" asked the doctor.
    

      "We think so because we don't see it."
    

      "Is that so? The social movements are the invention of the new literature.
      There are none among us."
    

      An argument began.
    

      "There are no deep social movements among us and never have been," the
      doctor declared loudly. "There is no end to what the new literature has
      invented! It has invented intellectual workers in the country, and you may
      search through all our villages and find at the most some lout in a reefer
      jacket or a black frock-coat who will make four mistakes in spelling a
      word of three letters. Cultured life has not yet begun among us. There's
      the same savagery, the same uniform boorishness, the same triviality, as
      five hundred years ago. Movements, currents there have been, but it has
      all been petty, paltry, bent upon vulgar and mercenary interests-and one
      cannot see anything important in them. If you think you have discerned a
      deep social movement, and in following it you devote yourself to tasks in
      the modern taste, such as the emancipation of insects from slavery or
      abstinence from beef rissoles, I congratulate you, Madam. We must study,
      and study, and study and we must wait a bit with our deep social
      movements; we are not mature enough for them yet; and to tell the truth,
      we don't know anything about them."
    

      "You don't know anything about them, but I do," said Mariya Viktorovna.
      "Goodness, how tiresome you are to-day!"
    

      "Our duty is to study and to study, to try to accumulate as much knowledge
      as possible, for genuine social movements arise where there is knowledge;
      and the happiness of mankind in the future lies only in knowledge. I drink
      to science!"
    

      "There is no doubt about one thing: one must organize one's life somehow
      differently," said Mariya Viktorovna, after a moment's silence and
      thought. "Life, such as it has been hitherto, is not worth having. Don't
      let us talk about it."
    

      As we came away from her the cathedral clock struck two.
    

      "Did you like her?" asked the doctor; "she's nice, isn't she?"
    

      On Christmas day we dined with Mariya Viktorovna, and all through the
      holidays we went to see her almost every day. There was never anyone there
      but ourselves, and she was right when she said that she had no friends in
      the town but the doctor and me. We spent our time for the most part in
      conversation; sometimes the doctor brought some book or magazine and read
      aloud to us. In reality he was the first well-educated man I had met in my
      life: I cannot judge whether he knew a great deal, but he always displayed
      his knowledge as though he wanted other people to share it. When he talked
      about anything relating to medicine he was not like any one of the doctors
      in our town, but made a fresh, peculiar impression upon me, and I fancied
      that if he liked he might have become a real man of science. And he was
      perhaps the only person who had a real influence upon me at that time.
      Seeing him, and reading the books he gave me, I began little by little to
      feel a thirst for the knowledge which would have given significance to my
      cheerless labour. It seemed strange to me, for instance, that I had not
      known till then that the whole world was made up of sixty elements, I had
      not known what oil was, what paints were, and that I could have got on
      without knowing these things. My acquaintance with the doctor elevated me
      morally too. I was continually arguing with him and, though I usually
      remained of my own opinion, yet, thanks to him, I began to perceive that
      everything was not clear to me, and I began trying to work out as far as I
      could definite convictions in myself, that the dictates of conscience
      might be definite, and that there might be nothing vague in my mind. Yet,
      though he was the most cultivated and best man in the town, he was
      nevertheless far from perfection. In his manners, in his habit of turning
      every conversation into an argument, in his pleasant tenor, even in his
      friendliness, there was something coarse, like a divinity student, and
      when he took off his coat and sat in his silk shirt, or flung a tip to a
      waiter in the restaurant, I always fancied that culture might be all very
      well, but the Tatar was fermenting in him still.
    

      At Epiphany he went back to Petersburg. He went off in the morning, and
      after dinner my sister came in. Without taking off her fur coat and her
      cap she sat down in silence, very pale, and kept her eyes fixed on the
      same spot. She was chilled by the frost and one could see that she was
      upset by it.
    

      "You must have caught cold," I said.
    

      Her eyes filled with tears; she got up and went out to Karpovna without
      saying a word to me, as though I had hurt her feelings. And a little later
      I heard her saying, in a tone of bitter reproach:
    

      "Nurse, what have I been living for till now? What? Tell me, haven't I
      wasted my youth? All the best years of my life to know nothing but keeping
      accounts, pouring out tea, counting the halfpence, entertaining visitors,
      and thinking there was nothing better in the world! Nurse, do understand,
      I have the cravings of a human being, and I want to live, and they have
      turned me into something like a housekeeper. It's horrible, horrible!"
    

      She flung her keys towards the door, and they fell with a jingle into my
      room. They were the keys of the sideboard, of the kitchen cupboard, of the
      cellar, and of the tea-caddy, the keys which my mother used to carry.
    

      "Oh, merciful heavens!" cried the old woman in horror. "Holy Saints
      above!"
    

      Before going home my sister came into my room to pick up the keys, and
      said:
    

      "You must forgive me. Something queer has happened to me lately."
    

      VIII
    

      On returning home late one evening from Mariya Viktorovna's I found
      waiting in my room a young police inspector in a new uniform; he was
      sitting at my table, looking through my books.
    

      "At last," he said, getting up and stretching himself. "This is the third
      time I have been to you. The Governor commands you to present yourself
      before him at nine o'clock in the morning. Without fail."
    

      He took from me a signed statement that I would act upon his Excellency's
      command, and went away. This late visit of the police inspector and
      unexpected invitation to the Governor's had an overwhelmingly oppressive
      effect upon me. From my earliest childhood I have felt terror-stricken in
      the presence of gendarmes, policemen, and law court officials, and now I
      was tormented by uneasiness, as though I were really guilty in some way.
      And I could not get to sleep. My nurse and Prokofy were also upset and
      could not sleep. My nurse had earache too; she moaned, and several times
      began crying with pain. Hearing that I was awake, Prokofy came into my
      room with a lamp and sat down at the table.
    

      "You ought to have a drink of pepper cordial," he said, after a moment's
      thought. "If one does have a drink in this vale of tears it does no harm.
      And if Mamma were to pour a little pepper cordial in her ear it would do
      her a lot of good."
    

      Between two and three he was going to the slaughter-house for the meat. I
      knew I should not sleep till morning now, and to get through the time till
      nine o'clock I went with him. We walked with a lantern, while his boy
      Nikolka, aged thirteen, with blue patches on his cheeks from frostbites, a
      regular young brigand to judge by his expression, drove after us in the
      sledge, urging on the horse in a husky voice.
    

      "I suppose they will punish you at the Governor's," Prokofy said to me on
      the way. "There are rules of the trade for governors, and rules for the
      higher clergy, and rules for the officers, and rules for the doctors, and
      every class has its rules. But you haven't kept to your rules, and you
      can't be allowed."
    

      The slaughter-house was behind the cemetery, and till then I had only seen
      it in the distance. It consisted of three gloomy barns, surrounded by a
      grey fence, and when the wind blew from that quarter on hot days in
      summer, it brought a stifling stench from them. Now going into the yard in
      the dark I did not see the barns; I kept coming across horses and sledges,
      some empty, some loaded up with meat. Men were walking about with
      lanterns, swearing in a disgusting way. Prokofy and Nikolka swore just as
      revoltingly, and the air was in a continual uproar with swearing,
      coughing, and the neighing of horses.
    

      There was a smell of dead bodies and of dung. It was thawing, the snow was
      changing into mud; and in the darkness it seemed to me that I was walking
      through pools of blood.
    

      Having piled up the sledges full of meat we set off to the butcher's shop
      in the market. It began to get light. Cooks with baskets and elderly
      ladies in mantles came along one after another. Prokofy, with a chopper in
      his hand, in a white apron spattered with blood, swore fearful oaths,
      crossed himself at the church, shouted aloud for the whole market to hear,
      that he was giving away the meat at cost price and even at a loss to
      himself. He gave short weight and short change, the cooks saw that, but,
      deafened by his shouts, did not protest, and only called him a hangman.
      Brandishing and bringing down his terrible chopper he threw himself into
      picturesque attitudes, and each time uttered the sound "Geck" with a
      ferocious expression, and I was afraid he really would chop off somebody's
      head or hand.
    

      I spent all the morning in the butcher's shop, and when at last I went to
      the Governor's, my overcoat smelt of meat and blood. My state of mind was
      as though I were being sent spear in hand to meet a bear. I remember the
      tall staircase with a striped carpet on it, and the young official, with
      shiny buttons, who mutely motioned me to the door with both hands, and ran
      to announce me. I went into a hall luxuriously but frigidly and
      tastelessly furnished, and the high, narrow mirrors in the spaces between
      the walls, and the bright yellow window curtains, struck the eye
      particularly unpleasantly. One could see that the governors were changed,
      but the furniture remained the same. Again the young official motioned me
      with both hands to the door, and I went up to a big green table at which a
      military general, with the Order of Vladimir on his breast, was standing.
    

      "Mr. Poloznev, I have asked you to come," he began, holding a letter in
      his hand, and opening his mouth like a round "o," "I have asked you to
      come here to inform you of this. Your highly respected father has appealed
      by letter and by word of mouth to the Marshal of the Nobility begging him
      to summon you, and to lay before you the inconsistency of your behaviour
      with the rank of the nobility to which you have the honour to belong. His
      Excellency Alexandr Pavlovitch, justly supposing that your conduct might
      serve as a bad example, and considering that mere persuasion on his part
      would not be sufficient, but that official intervention in earnest was
      essential, presents me here in this letter with his views in regard to
      you, which I share."
    

      He said this, quietly, respectfully, standing erect, as though I were his
      superior officer and looking at me with no trace of severity. His face
      looked worn and wizened, and was all wrinkles; there were bags under his
      eyes; his hair was dyed; and it was impossible to tell from his appearance
      how old he was-forty or sixty.
    

      "I trust," he went on, "that you appreciate the delicacy of our honoured
      Alexandr Pavlovitch, who has addressed himself to me not officially, but
      privately. I, too, have asked you to come here unofficially, and I am
      speaking to you, not as a Governor, but from a sincere regard for your
      father. And so I beg you either to alter your line of conduct and return
      to duties in keeping with your rank, or to avoid setting a bad example,
      remove to another district where you are not known, and where you can
      follow any occupation you please. In the other case, I shall be forced to
      take extreme measures."
    

      He stood for half a minute in silence, looking at me with his mouth open.
    

      "Are you a vegetarian?" he asked.
    

      "No, your Excellency, I eat meat."
    

      He sat down and drew some papers towards him. I bowed and went out.
    

      It was not worth while now to go to work before dinner. I went home to
      sleep, but could not sleep from an unpleasant, sickly feeling, induced by
      the slaughter house and my conversation with the Governor, and when the
      evening came I went, gloomy and out of sorts, to Mariya Viktorovna. I told
      her how I had been at the Governor's, while she stared at me in perplexity
      as though she did not believe it, then suddenly began laughing gaily,
      loudly, irrepressibly, as only good-natured laughter-loving people can.
    

      "If only one could tell that in Petersburg!" she brought out, almost
      falling over with laughter, and propping herself against the table. "If
      one could tell that in Petersburg!"
    

      IX
    

      Now we used to see each other often, sometimes twice a day. She used to
      come to the cemetery almost every day after dinner, and read the epitaphs
      on the crosses and tombstones while she waited for me. Sometimes she would
      come into the church, and, standing by me, would look on while I worked.
      The stillness, the naÃ¯ve work of the painters and gilders, Radish's sage
      reflections, and the fact that I did not differ externally from the other
      workmen, and worked just as they did in my waistcoat with no socks on, and
      that I was addressed familiarly by them-all this was new to her and
      touched her. One day a workman, who was painting a dove on the ceiling,
      called out to me in her presence:
    

      "Misail, hand me up the white paint."
    

      I took him the white paint, and afterwards, when I let myself down by the
      frail scaffolding, she looked at me, touched to tears and smiling.
    

      "What a dear you are!" she said.
    

      I remembered from my childhood how a green parrot, belonging to one of the
      rich men of the town, had escaped from its cage, and how for quite a month
      afterwards the beautiful bird had haunted the town, flying from garden to
      garden, homeless and solitary. Mariya Viktorovna reminded me of that bird.
    

      "There is positively nowhere for me to go now but the cemetery," she said
      to me with a laugh. "The town has become disgustingly dull. At the
      Azhogins' they are still reciting, singing, lisping. I have grown to
      detest them of late; your sister is an unsociable creature; Mademoiselle
      Blagovo hates me for some reason. I don't care for the theatre. Tell me
      where am I to go?"
    

      When I went to see her I smelt of paint and turpentine, and my hands were
      stained-and she liked that; she wanted me to come to her in my ordinary
      working clothes; but in her drawing-room those clothes made me feel
      awkward. I felt embarrassed, as though I were in uniform, so I always put
      on my new serge trousers when I went to her. And she did not like that.
    

      "You must own you are not quite at home in your new character," she said
      to me one day. "Your workman's dress does not feel natural to you; you are
      awkward in it. Tell me, isn't that because you haven't a firm conviction,
      and are not satisfied? The very kind of work you have chosen-your
      painting-surely it does not satisfy you, does it?" she asked, laughing. "I
      know paint makes things look nicer and last longer, but those things
      belong to rich people who live in towns, and after all they are luxuries.
      Besides, you have often said yourself that everybody ought to get his
      bread by the work of his own hands, yet you get money and not bread. Why
      shouldn't you keep to the literal sense of your words? You ought to be
      getting bread, that is, you ought to be ploughing, sowing, reaping,
      threshing, or doing something which has a direct connection with
      agriculture, for instance, looking after cows, digging, building huts of
      logs. . . ."
    

      She opened a pretty cupboard that stood near her writing-table, and said:
    

      "I am saying all this to you because I want to let you into my secret. VoilÃ !
      This is my agricultural library. Here I have fields, kitchen garden and
      orchard, and cattleyard and beehives. I read them greedily, and have
      already learnt all the theory to the tiniest detail. My dream, my darling
      wish, is to go to our Dubetchnya as soon as March is here. It's marvellous
      there, exquisite, isn't it? The first year I shall have a look round and
      get into things, and the year after I shall begin to work properly myself,
      putting my back into it as they say. My father has promised to give me
      Dubetchnya and I shall do exactly what I like with it."
    

      Flushed, excited to tears, and laughing, she dreamed aloud how she would
      live at Dubetchnya, and what an interesting life it would be! I envied
      her. March was near, the days were growing longer and longer, and on
      bright sunny days water dripped from the roofs at midday, and there was a
      fragrance of spring; I, too, longed for the country.
    

      And when she said that she should move to Dubetchnya, I realized vividly
      that I should remain in the town alone, and I felt that I envied her with
      her cupboard of books and her agriculture. I knew nothing of work on the
      land, and did not like it, and I should have liked to have told her that
      work on the land was slavish toil, but I remembered that something similar
      had been said more than once by my father, and I held my tongue.
    

      Lent began. Viktor Ivanitch, whose existence I had begun to forget,
      arrived from Petersburg. He arrived unexpectedly, without even a telegram
      to say he was coming. When I went in, as usual in the evening, he was
      walking about the drawing-room, telling some story with his face freshly
      washed and shaven, looking ten years younger: his daughter was kneeling on
      the floor, taking out of his trunks boxes, bottles, and books, and handing
      them to Pavel the footman. I involuntarily drew back a step when I saw the
      engineer, but he held out both hands to me and said, smiling, showing his
      strong white teeth that looked like a sledge-driver's:
    

      "Here he is, here he is! Very glad to see you, Mr. House-painter! Masha
      has told me all about it; she has been singing your praises. I quite
      understand and approve," he went on, taking my arm. "To be a good workman
      is ever so much more honest and more sensible than wasting government
      paper and wearing a cockade on your head. I myself worked in Belgium with
      these very hands and then spent two years as a mechanic. . . ."
    

      He was wearing a short reefer jacket and indoor slippers; he walked like a
      man with the gout, rolling slightly from side to side and rubbing his
      hands. Humming something he softly purred and hugged himself with
      satisfaction at being at home again at last, and able to have his beloved
      shower bath.
    

      "There is no disputing," he said to me at supper, "there is no disputing;
      you are all nice and charming people, but for some reason, as soon as you
      take to manual labour, or go in for saving the peasants, in the long run
      it all comes to no more than being a dissenter. Aren't you a dissenter?
      Here you don't take vodka. What's the meaning of that if it is not being a
      dissenter?"
    

      To satisfy him I drank some vodka and I drank some wine, too. We tasted
      the cheese, the sausage, the pÃ¢tÃ©s, the pickles, and the savouries of all
      sorts that the engineer had brought with him, and the wine that had come
      in his absence from abroad. The wine was first-rate. For some reason the
      engineer got wine and cigars from abroad without paying duty; the caviare
      and the dried sturgeon someone sent him for nothing; he did not pay rent
      for his flat as the owner of the house provided the kerosene for the line;
      and altogether he and his daughter produced on me the impression that all
      the best in the world was at their service, and provided for them for
      nothing.
    

      I went on going to see them, but not with the same eagerness. The engineer
      made me feel constrained, and in his presence I did not feel free. I could
      not face his clear, guileless eyes, his reflections wearied and sickened
      me; I was sickened, too, by the memory that so lately I had been in the
      employment of this red-faced, well-fed man, and that he had been brutally
      rude to me. It is true that he put his arm round my waist, slapped me on
      the shoulder in a friendly way, approved my manner of life, but I felt
      that, as before, he despised my insignificance, and only put up with me to
      please his daughter, and I couldn't now laugh and talk as I liked, and I
      behaved unsociably and kept expecting that in another minute he would
      address me as Panteley as he did his footman Pavel. How my pride as a
      provincial and a working man was revolted. I, a proletarian, a house
      painter, went every day to rich people who were alien to me, and whom the
      whole town regarded as though they were foreigners, and every day I drank
      costly wines with them and ate unusual dainties-my conscience refused to
      be reconciled to it! On my way to the house I sullenly avoided meeting
      people, and looked at them from under my brows as though I really were a
      dissenter, and when I was going home from the engineer's I was ashamed of
      my well-fed condition.
    

      Above all I was afraid of being carried away. Whether I was walking along
      the street, or working, or talking to the other fellows, I was all the
      time thinking of one thing only, of going in the evening to see Mariya
      Viktorovna and was picturing her voice, her laugh, her movements. When I
      was getting ready to go to her I always spent a long time before my
      nurse's warped looking-glass, as I fastened my tie; my serge trousers were
      detestable in my eyes, and I suffered torments, and at the same time
      despised myself for being so trivial. When she called to me out of the
      other room that she was not dressed and asked me to wait, I listened to
      her dressing; it agitated me, I felt as though the ground were giving way
      under my feet. And when I saw a woman's figure in the street, even at a
      distance, I invariably compared it. It seemed to me that all our girls and
      women were vulgar, that they were absurdly dressed, and did not know how
      to hold themselves; and these comparisons aroused a feeling of pride in
      me: Mariya Viktorovna was the best of them all! And I dreamed of her and
      myself at night.
    

      One evening at supper with the engineer we ate a whole lobster As I was
      going home afterwards I remembered that the engineer twice called me "My
      dear fellow" at supper, and I reflected that they treated me very kindly
      in that house, as they might an unfortunate big dog who had been kicked
      out by its owners, that they were amusing themselves with me, and that
      when they were tired of me they would turn me out like a dog. I felt
      ashamed and wounded, wounded to the point of tears as though I had been
      insulted, and looking up at the sky I took a vow to put an end to all
      this.
    

      The next day I did not go to the Dolzhikov's. Late in the evening, when it
      was quite dark and raining, I walked along Great Dvoryansky Street,
      looking up at the windows. Everyone was asleep at the Azhogins', and the
      only light was in one of the furthest windows. It was Madame Azhogin in
      her own room, sewing by the light of three candles, imagining that she was
      combating superstition. Our house was in darkness, but at the Dolzhikovs',
      on the contrary, the windows were lighted up, but one could distinguish
      nothing through the flowers and the curtains. I kept walking up and down
      the street; the cold March rain drenched me through. I heard my father
      come home from the club; he stood knocking at the gate. A minute later a
      light appeared at the window, and I saw my sister, who was hastening down
      with a lamp, while with the other hand she was twisting her thick hair
      together as she went. Then my father walked about the drawing-room,
      talking and rubbing his hands, while my sister sat in a low chair,
      thinking and not listening to what he said.
    

      But then they went away; the light went out. . . . I glanced round at the
      engineer's, and there, too, all was darkness now. In the dark and the rain
      I felt hopelessly alone, abandoned to the whims of destiny; I felt that
      all my doings, my desires, and everything I had thought and said till then
      were trivial in comparison with my loneliness, in comparison with my
      present suffering, and the suffering that lay before me in the future.
      Alas, the thoughts and doings of living creatures are not nearly so
      significant as their sufferings! And without clearly realizing what I was
      doing, I pulled at the bell of the Dolzhikovs' gate, broke it, and ran
      along the street like some naughty boy, with a feeling of terror in my
      heart, expecting every moment that they would come out and recognize me.
      When I stopped at the end of the street to take breath I could hear
      nothing but the sound of the rain, and somewhere in the distance a
      watchman striking on a sheet of iron.
    

      For a whole week I did not go to the Dolzhikovs'. My serge trousers were
      sold. There was nothing doing in the painting trade. I knew the pangs of
      hunger again, and earned from twopence to fourpence a day, where I could,
      by heavy and unpleasant work. Struggling up to my knees in the cold mud,
      straining my chest, I tried to stifle my memories, and, as it were, to
      punish myself for the cheeses and preserves with which I had been regaled
      at the engineer's. But all the same, as soon as I lay in bed, wet and
      hungry, my sinful imagination immediately began to paint exquisite,
      seductive pictures, and with amazement I acknowledged to myself that I was
      in love, passionately in love, and I fell into a sound, heavy sleep,
      feeling that hard labour only made my body stronger and younger.
    

      One evening snow began falling most inappropriately, and the wind blew
      from the north as though winter had come back again. When I returned from
      work that evening I found Mariya Viktorovna in my room. She was sitting in
      her fur coat, and had both hands in her muff.
    

      "Why don't you come to see me?" she asked, raising her clear, clever eyes,
      and I was utterly confused with delight and stood stiffly upright before
      her, as I used to stand facing my father when he was going to beat me; she
      looked into my face and I could see from her eyes that she understood why
      I was confused.
    

      "Why don't you come to see me?" she repeated. "If you don't want to come,
      you see, I have come to you."
    

      She got up and came close to me.
    

      "Don't desert me," she said, and her eyes filled with tears. "I am alone,
      utterly alone."
    

      She began crying; and, hiding her face in her muff, articulated:
    

      "Alone! My life is hard, very hard, and in all the world I have no one but
      you. Don't desert me!"
    

      Looking for a handkerchief to wipe her tears she smiled; we were silent
      for some time, then I put my arms round her and kissed her, scratching my
      cheek till it bled with her hatpin as I did it.
    

      And we began talking to each other as though we had been on the closest
      terms for ages and ages.
    

      X
    

      Two days later she sent me to Dubetchnya and I was unutterably delighted
      to go. As I walked towards the station and afterwards, as I was sitting in
      the train, I kept laughing from no apparent cause, and people looked at me
      as though I were drunk. Snow was falling, and there were still frosts in
      the mornings, but the roads were already dark-coloured and rooks hovered
      over them, cawing.
    

      At first I had intended to fit up an abode for us two, Masha and me, in
      the lodge at the side opposite Madame Tcheprakov's lodge, but it appeared
      that the doves and the ducks had been living there for a long time, and it
      was impossible to clean it without destroying a great number of nests.
      There was nothing for it but to live in the comfortless rooms of the big
      house with the sunblinds. The peasants called the house the palace; there
      were more than twenty rooms in it, and the only furniture was a piano and
      a child's arm-chair lying in the attic. And if Masha had brought all her
      furniture from the town we should even then have been unable to get rid of
      the impression of immense emptiness and cold. I picked out three small
      rooms with windows looking into the garden, and worked from early morning
      till night, setting them to rights, putting in new panes, papering the
      walls, filling up the holes and chinks in the floors. It was easy,
      pleasant work. I was continually running to the river to see whether the
      ice were not going; I kept fancying that starlings were flying. And at
      night, thinking of Masha, I listened with an unutterably sweet feeling,
      with clutching delight to the noise of the rats and the wind droning and
      knocking above the ceiling. It seemed as though some old house spirit were
      coughing in the attic.
    

      The snow was deep; a great deal had fallen even at the end of March, but
      it melted quickly, as though by magic, and the spring floods passed in a
      tumultuous rush, so that by the beginning of April the starlings were
      already noisy, and yellow butterflies were flying in the garden. It was
      exquisite weather. Every day, towards evening, I used to walk to the town
      to meet Masha, and what a delight it was to walk with bare feet along the
      gradually drying, still soft road. Half-way I used to sit down and look
      towards the town, not venturing to go near it. The sight of it troubled
      me. I kept wondering how the people I knew would behave to me when they
      heard of my love. What would my father say? What troubled me particularly
      was the thought that my life was more complicated, and that I had
      completely lost all power to set it right, and that, like a balloon, it
      was bearing me away, God knows whither. I no longer considered the problem
      how to earn my daily bread, how to live, but thought about-I really don't
      know what.
    

      Masha used to come in a carriage; I used to get in with her, and we drove
      to Dubetchnya, feeling light-hearted and free. Or, after waiting till the
      sun had set, I would go back dissatisfied and dreary, wondering why Masha
      had not come; at the gate or in the garden I would be met by a sweet,
      unexpected apparition-it was she! It would turn out that she had come by
      rail, and had walked from the station. What a festival it was! In a simple
      woollen dress with a kerchief on her head, with a modest sunshade, but
      laced in, slender, in expensive foreign boots-it was a talented actress
      playing the part of a little workgirl. We looked round our domain and
      decided which should be her room, and which mine, where we would have our
      avenue, our kitchen garden, our beehives.
    

      We already had hens, ducks, and geese, which we loved because they were
      ours. We had, all ready for sowing, oats, clover, timothy grass,
      buckwheat, and vegetable seeds, and we always looked at all these stores
      and discussed at length the crop we might get; and everything Masha said
      to me seemed extraordinarily clever, and fine. This was the happiest time
      of my life.
    

      Soon after St. Thomas's week we were married at our parish church in the
      village of Kurilovka, two miles from Dubetchnya. Masha wanted everything
      to be done quietly; at her wish our "best men" were peasant lads, the
      sacristan sang alone, and we came back from the church in a small, jolting
      chaise which she drove herself. Our only guest from the town was my sister
      Kleopatra, to whom Masha sent a note three days before the wedding. My
      sister came in a white dress and wore gloves. During the wedding she cried
      quietly from joy and tenderness. Her expression was motherly and
      infinitely kind. She was intoxicated with our happiness, and smiled as
      though she were absorbing a sweet delirium, and looking at her during our
      wedding, I realized that for her there was nothing in the world higher
      than love, earthly love, and that she was dreaming of it secretly,
      timidly, but continually and passionately. She embraced and kissed Masha,
      and, not knowing how to express her rapture, said to her of me: "He is
      good! He is very good!"
    

      Before she went away she changed into her ordinary dress, and drew me into
      the garden to talk to me alone.
    

      "Father is very much hurt," she said, "that you have written nothing to
      him. You ought to have asked for his blessing. But in reality he is very
      much pleased. He says that this marriage will raise you in the eyes of all
      society, and that under the influence of Mariya Viktorovna you will begin
      to take a more serious view of life. We talk of nothing but you in the
      evenings now, and yesterday he actually used the expression: 'Our Misail.'
      That pleased me. It seems as though he had some plan in his mind, and I
      fancy he wants to set you an example of magnanimity and be the first to
      speak of reconciliation. It is very possible he may come here to see you
      in a day or two."
    

      She hurriedly made the sign of the cross over me several times and said:
    

      "Well, God be with you. Be happy. Anyuta Blagovo is a very clever girl;
      she says about your marriage that God is sending you a fresh ordeal. To be
      sure-married life does not bring only joy but suffering too. That's bound
      to be so."
    

      Masha and I walked a couple of miles to see her on her way; we walked back
      slowly and in silence, as though we were resting. Masha held my hand, my
      heart felt light, and I had no inclination to talk about love; we had
      become closer and more akin now that we were married, and we felt that
      nothing now could separate us.
    

      "Your sister is a nice creature," said Masha, "but it seems as though she
      had been tormented for years. Your father must be a terrible man."
    

      I began telling her how my sister and I had been brought up, and what a
      senseless torture our childhood had really been. When she heard how my
      father had so lately beaten me, she shuddered and drew closer to me.
    

      "Don't tell me any more," she said. "It's horrible!"
    

      Now she never left me. We lived together in the three rooms in the big
      house, and in the evenings we bolted the door which led to the empty part
      of the house, as though someone were living there whom we did not know,
      and were afraid of. I got up early, at dawn, and immediately set to work
      of some sort. I mended the carts, made paths in the garden, dug the flower
      beds, painted the roof of the house. When the time came to sow the oats I
      tried to plough the ground over again, to harrow and to sow, and I did it
      all conscientiously, keeping up with our labourer; I was worn out, the
      rain and the cold wind made my face and feet burn for hours afterwards. I
      dreamed of ploughed land at night. But field labour did not attract me. I
      did not understand farming, and I did not care for it; it was perhaps
      because my forefathers had not been tillers of the soil, and the very
      blood that flowed in my veins was purely of the city. I loved nature
      tenderly; I loved the fields and meadows and kitchen gardens, but the
      peasant who turned up the soil with his plough and urged on his pitiful
      horse, wet and tattered, with his craning neck, was to me the expression
      of coarse, savage, ugly force, and every time I looked at his uncouth
      movements I involuntarily began thinking of the legendary life of the
      remote past, before men knew the use of fire. The fierce bull that ran
      with the peasants' herd, and the horses, when they dashed about the
      village, stamping their hoofs, moved me to fear, and everything rather
      big, strong, and angry, whether it was the ram with its horns, the gander,
      or the yard-dog, seemed to me the expression of the same coarse, savage
      force. This mood was particularly strong in me in bad weather, when heavy
      clouds were hanging over the black ploughed land. Above all, when I was
      ploughing or sowing, and two or three people stood looking how I was doing
      it, I had not the feeling that this work was inevitable and obligatory,
      and it seemed to me that I was amusing myself. I preferred doing something
      in the yard, and there was nothing I liked so much as painting the roof.
    

      I used to walk through the garden and the meadow to our mill. It was let
      to a peasant of Kurilovka called Stepan, a handsome, dark fellow with a
      thick black beard, who looked very strong. He did not like the miller's
      work, and looked upon it as dreary and unprofitable, and only lived at the
      mill in order not to live at home. He was a leather-worker, and was always
      surrounded by a pleasant smell of tar and leather. He was not fond of
      talking, he was listless and sluggish, and was always sitting in the
      doorway or on the river bank, humming "oo-loo-loo." His wife and
      mother-in-law, both white-faced, languid, and meek, used sometimes to come
      from Kurilovka to see him; they made low bows to him and addressed him
      formally, "Stepan Petrovitch," while he went on sitting on the river bank,
      softly humming "oo-loo-loo," without responding by word or movement to
      their bows. One hour and then a second would pass in silence. His
      mother-in-law and wife, after whispering together, would get up and gaze
      at him for some time, expecting him to look round; then they would make a
      low bow, and in sugary, chanting voices, say:
    

      "Good-bye, Stepan Petrovitch!"
    

      And they would go away. After that Stepan, picking up the parcel they had
      left, containing cracknels or a shirt, would heave a sigh and say, winking
      in their direction:
    

      "The female sex!"
    

      The mill with two sets of millstones worked day and night. I used to help
      Stepan; I liked the work, and when he went off I was glad to stay and take
      his place.
    

      XI
    

      After bright warm weather came a spell of wet; all May it rained and was
      cold. The sound of the millwheels and of the rain disposed one to
      indolence and slumber. The floor trembled, there was a smell of flour, and
      that, too, induced drowsiness. My wife in a short fur-lined jacket, and in
      men's high golosh boots, would make her appearance twice a day, and she
      always said the same thing:
    

      "And this is called summer! Worse than it was in October!"
    

      We used to have tea and make the porridge together, or we would sit for
      hours at a stretch without speaking, waiting for the rain to stop. Once,
      when Stepan had gone off to the fair, Masha stayed all night at the mill.
      When we got up we could not tell what time it was, as the rainclouds
      covered the whole sky; but sleepy cocks were crowing at Dubetchnya, and
      landrails were calling in the meadows; it was still very, very early. . .
      . My wife and I went down to the millpond and drew out the net which
      Stepan had thrown in over night in our presence. A big pike was struggling
      in it, and a cray-fish was twisting about, clawing upwards with its
      pincers.
    

      "Let them go," said Masha. "Let them be happy too."
    

      Because we got up so early and afterwards did nothing, that day seemed
      very long, the longest day in my life. Towards evening Stepan came back
      and I went home.
    

      "Your father came to-day," said Masha.
    

      "Where is he?" I asked.
    

      "He has gone away. I would not see him."
    

      Seeing that I remained standing and silent, that I was sorry for my
      father, she said:
    

      "One must be consistent. I would not see him, and sent word to him not to
      trouble to come and see us again."
    

      A minute later I was out at the gate and walking to the town to explain
      things to my father. It was muddy, slippery, cold. For the first time
      since my marriage I felt suddenly sad, and in my brain exhausted by that
      long, grey day, there was stirring the thought that perhaps I was not
      living as I ought. I was worn out; little by little I was overcome by
      despondency and indolence, I did not want to move or think, and after
      going on a little I gave it up with a wave of my hand and turned back.
    

      The engineer in a leather overcoat with a hood was standing in the middle
      of the yard.
    

      "Where's the furniture? There used to be lovely furniture in the Empire
      style: there used to be pictures, there used to be vases, while now you
      could play ball in it! I bought the place with the furniture. The devil
      take her!"
    

      Moisey, a thin pock-marked fellow of twenty-five, with insolent little
      eyes, who was in the service of the general's widow, stood near him
      crumpling up his cap in his hands; one of his cheeks was bigger than the
      other, as though he had lain too long on it.
    

      "Your honour was graciously pleased to buy the place without the
      furniture," he brought out irresolutely; "I remember."
    

      "Hold your tongue!" shouted the engineer; he turned crimson and shook with
      anger . . . and the echo in the garden loudly repeated his shout.
    

      XII
    

      When I was doing anything in the garden or the yard, Moisey would stand
      beside me, and folding his arms behind his back he would stand lazily and
      impudently staring at me with his little eyes. And this irritated me to
      such a degree that I threw up my work and went away.
    

      From Stepan we heard that Moisey was Madame Tcheprakov's lover. I noticed
      that when people came to her to borrow money they addressed themselves
      first to Moisey, and once I saw a peasant, black from head to foot-he must
      have been a coalheaver-bow down at Moisey's feet. Sometimes, after a
      little whispering, he gave out money himself, without consulting his
      mistress, from which I concluded that he did a little business on his own
      account.
    

      He used to shoot in our garden under our windows, carried off victuals
      from our cellar, borrowed our horses without asking permission, and we
      were indignant and began to feel as though Dubetchnya were not ours, and
      Masha would say, turning pale:
    

      "Can we really have to go on living with these reptiles another eighteen
      months?"
    

      Madame Tcheprakov's son, Ivan, was serving as a guard on our railway-line.
      He had grown much thinner and feebler during the winter, so that a single
      glass was enough to make him drunk, and he shivered out of the sunshine.
      He wore the guard's uniform with aversion and was ashamed of it, but
      considered his post a good one, as he could steal the candles and sell
      them. My new position excited in him a mixed feeling of wonder, envy, and
      a vague hope that something of the same sort might happen to him. He used
      to watch Masha with ecstatic eyes, ask me what I had for dinner now, and
      his lean and ugly face wore a sad and sweetish expression, and he moved
      his fingers as though he were feeling my happiness with them.
    

      "Listen, Better-than-nothing," he said fussily, relighting his cigarette
      at every instant; there was always a litter where he stood, for he wasted
      dozens of matches, lighting one cigarette. "Listen, my life now is the
      nastiest possible. The worst of it is any subaltern can shout: 'Hi, there,
      guard!' I have overheard all sorts of things in the train, my boy, and do
      you know, I have learned that life's a beastly thing! My mother has been
      the ruin of me! A doctor in the train told me that if parents are immoral,
      their children are drunkards or criminals. Think of that!"
    

      Once he came into the yard, staggering; his eyes gazed about blankly, his
      breathing was laboured; he laughed and cried and babbled as though in a
      high fever, and the only words I could catch in his muddled talk were, "My
      mother! Where's my mother?" which he uttered with a wail like a child who
      has lost his mother in a crowd. I led him into our garden and laid him
      down under a tree, and Masha and I took turns to sit by him all that day
      and all night. He was very sick, and Masha looked with aversion at his
      pale, wet face, and said:
    

      "Is it possible these reptiles will go on living another year and a half
      in our yard? It's awful! it's awful!"
    

      And how many mortifications the peasants caused us! How many bitter
      disappointments in those early days in the spring months, when we so
      longed to be happy. My wife built a school. I drew a plan of a school for
      sixty boys, and the Zemstvo Board approved of it, but advised us to build
      the school at Kurilovka the big village which was only two miles from us.
      Moreover, the school at Kurilovka in which children-from four villages,
      our Dubetchnya being one of the number-were taught, was old and too small,
      and the floor was scarcely safe to walk upon. At the end of March at
      Masha's wish, she was appointed guardian of the Kurilovka school, and at
      the beginning of April we three times summoned the village assembly, and
      tried to persuade the peasants that their school was old and overcrowded,
      and that it was essential to build a new one. A member of the Zemstvo
      Board and the Inspector of Peasant Schools came, and they, too, tried to
      persuade them. After each meeting the peasants surrounded us, begging for
      a bucket of vodka; we were hot in the crowd; we were soon exhausted, and
      returned home dissatisfied and a little ill at ease. In the end the
      peasants set apart a plot of ground for the school, and were obliged to
      bring all the building material from the town with their own horses. And
      the very first Sunday after the spring corn was sown carts set off from
      Kurilovka and Dubetchnya to fetch bricks for the foundations. They set off
      as soon as it was light, and came back late in the evening; the peasants
      were drunk, and said they were worn out.
    

      As ill-luck would have it, the rain and the cold persisted all through
      May. The road was in an awful state: it was deep in mud. The carts usually
      drove into our yard when they came back from the town-and what a horrible
      ordeal it was. A potbellied horse would appear at the gate, setting its
      front legs wide apart; it would stumble forward before coming into the
      yard; a beam, nine yards long, wet and slimy-looking, crept in on a
      waggon. Beside it, muffled up against the rain, strode a peasant with the
      skirts of his coat tucked up in his belt, not looking where he was going,
      but stepping through the puddles. Another cart would appear with boards,
      then a third with a beam, a fourth . . . and the space before our house
      was gradually crowded up with horses, beams, and planks. Men and women,
      with their heads muffled and their skirts tucked up, would stare angrily
      at our windows, make an uproar, and clamour for the mistress to come out
      to them; coarse oaths were audible. Meanwhile Moisey stood at one side,
      and we fancied he was enjoying our discomfiture.
    

      "We are not going to cart any more," the peasants would shout. "We are
      worn out! Let her go and get the stuff herself."
    

      Masha, pale and flustered, expecting every minute that they would break
      into the house, would send them out a half-pail of vodka; after that the
      noise would subside and the long beams, one after another, would crawl
      slowly out of the yard.
    

      When I was setting off to see the building my wife was worried and said:
    

      "The peasants are spiteful; I only hope they won't do you a mischief. Wait
      a minute, I'll come with you."
    

      We drove to Kurilovka together, and there the carpenters asked us for a
      drink. The framework of the house was ready. It was time to lay the
      foundation, but the masons had not come; this caused delay, and the
      carpenters complained. And when at last the masons did come, it appeared
      that there was no sand; it had been somehow overlooked that it would be
      needed. Taking advantage of our helpless position, the peasants demanded
      thirty kopecks for each cartload, though the distance from the building to
      the river where they got the sand was less than a quarter of a mile, and
      more than five hundred cartloads were found to be necessary. There was no
      end to the misunderstandings, swearing, and importunity; my wife was
      indignant, and the foreman of the masons, Tit Petrov, an old man of
      seventy, took her by the arm, and said:
    

      "You look here! You look here! You only bring me the sand; I set ten men
      on at once, and in two days it will be done! You look here!"
    

      But they brought the sand and two days passed, and four, and a week, and
      instead of the promised foundations there was still a yawning hole.
    

      "It's enough to drive one out of one's senses," said my wife, in distress.
      "What people! What people!"
    

      In the midst of these disorderly doings the engineer arrived; he brought
      with him parcels of wine and savouries, and after a prolonged meal lay
      down for a nap in the verandah and snored so loudly that the labourers
      shook their heads and said: "Well!"
    

      Masha was not pleased at his coming, she did not trust him, though at the
      same time she asked his advice. When, after sleeping too long after
      dinner, he got up in a bad humour and said unpleasant things about our
      management of the place, or expressed regret that he had bought
      Dubetchnya, which had already been a loss to him, poor Masha's face wore
      an expression of misery. She would complain to him, and he would yawn and
      say that the peasants ought to be flogged.
    

      He called our marriage and our life a farce, and said it was a caprice, a
      whim.
    

      "She has done something of the sort before," he said about Masha. "She
      once fancied herself a great opera singer and left me; I was looking for
      her for two months, and, my dear soul, I spent a thousand roubles on
      telegrams alone."
    

      He no longer called me a dissenter or Mr. Painter, and did not as in the
      past express approval of my living like a workman, but said:
    

      "You are a strange person! You are not a normal person! I won't venture to
      prophesy, but you will come to a bad end!"
    

      And Masha slept badly at night, and was always sitting at our bedroom
      window thinking. There was no laughter at supper now, no charming
      grimaces. I was wretched, and when it rained, every drop that fell seemed
      to pierce my heart, like small shot, and I felt ready to fall on my knees
      before Masha and apologize for the weather. When the peasants made a noise
      in the yard I felt guilty also. For hours at a time I sat still in one
      place, thinking of nothing but what a splendid person Masha was, what a
      wonderful person. I loved her passionately, and I was fascinated by
      everything she did, everything she said. She had a bent for quiet,
      studious pursuits; she was fond of reading for hours together, of
      studying. Although her knowledge of farming was only from books she
      surprised us all by what she knew; and every piece of advice she gave was
      of value; not one was ever thrown away; and, with all that, what nobility,
      what taste, what graciousness, that graciousness which is only found in
      well-educated people.
    

      To this woman, with her sound, practical intelligence, the disorderly
      surroundings with petty cares and sordid anxieties in which we were living
      now were an agony: I saw that and could not sleep at night; my brain
      worked feverishly and I had a lump in my throat. I rushed about not
      knowing what to do.
    

      I galloped to the town and brought Masha books, newspapers, sweets,
      flowers; with Stepan I caught fish, wading for hours up to my neck in the
      cold water in the rain to catch eel-pout to vary our fare; I demeaned
      myself to beg the peasants not to make a noise; I plied them with vodka,
      bought them off, made all sorts of promises. And how many other foolish
      things I did!
    

      At last the rain ceased, the earth dried. One would get up at four o'clock
      in the morning; one would go out into the garden-where there was dew
      sparkling on the flowers, the twitter of birds, the hum of insects, not
      one cloud in the sky; and the garden, the meadows, and the river were so
      lovely, yet there were memories of the peasants, of their carts, of the
      engineer. Masha and I drove out together in the racing droshky to the
      fields to look at the oats. She used to drive, I sat behind; her shoulders
      were raised and the wind played with her hair.
    

      "Keep to the right!" she shouted to those she met.
    

      "You are like a sledge-driver," I said to her one day.
    

      "Maybe! Why, my grandfather, the engineer's father, was a sledge-driver.
      Didn't you know that?" she asked, turning to me, and at once she mimicked
      the way sledge-drivers shout and sing.
    

      "And thank God for that," I thought as I listened to her. "Thank God."
    

      And again memories of the peasants, of the carts, of the engineer. . . .
    

      XIII
    

      Dr. Blagovo arrived on his bicycle. My sister began coming often. Again
      there were conversations about manual labour, about progress, about a
      mysterious millennium awaiting mankind in the remote future. The doctor
      did not like our farmwork, because it interfered with arguments, and said
      that ploughing, reaping, grazing calves were unworthy of a free man, and
      all these coarse forms of the struggle for existence men would in time
      relegate to animals and machines, while they would devote themselves
      exclusively to scientific investigation. My sister kept begging them to
      let her go home earlier, and if she stayed on till late in the evening, or
      spent the night with us, there would be no end to the agitation.
    

      "Good Heavens, what a baby you are still!" said Masha reproachfully. "It
      is positively absurd."
    

      "Yes, it is absurd," my sister agreed, "I know it's absurd; but what is to
      be done if I haven't the strength to get over it? I keep feeling as though
      I were doing wrong."
    

      At haymaking I ached all over from the unaccustomed labour; in the
      evening, sitting on the verandah and talking with the others, I suddenly
      dropped asleep, and they laughed aloud at me. They waked me up and made me
      sit down to supper; I was overpowered with drowsiness and I saw the
      lights, the faces, and the plates as it were in a dream, heard the voices,
      but did not understand them. And getting up early in the morning, I took
      up the scythe at once, or went to the building and worked hard all day.
    

      When I remained at home on holidays I noticed that my sister and Masha
      were concealing something from me, and even seemed to be avoiding me. My
      wife was tender to me as before, but she had thoughts of her own apart,
      which she did not share with me. There was no doubt that her exasperation
      with the peasants was growing, the life was becoming more and more
      distasteful to her, and yet she did not complain to me. She talked to the
      doctor now more readily than she did to me, and I did not understand why
      it was so.
    

      It was the custom in our province at haymaking and harvest time for the
      labourers to come to the manor house in the evening and be regaled with
      vodka; even young girls drank a glass. We did not keep up this practice;
      the mowers and the peasant women stood about in our yard till late in the
      evening expecting vodka, and then departed abusing us. And all the time
      Masha frowned grimly and said nothing, or murmured to the doctor with
      exasperation: "Savages! Petchenyegs!"
    

      In the country newcomers are met ungraciously, almost with hostility, as
      they are at school. And we were received in this way. At first we were
      looked upon as stupid, silly people, who had bought an estate simply
      because we did not know what to do with our money. We were laughed at. The
      peasants grazed their cattle in our wood and even in our garden; they
      drove away our cows and horses to the village, and then demanded money for
      the damage done by them. They came in whole companies into our yard, and
      loudly clamoured that at the mowing we had cut some piece of land that did
      not belong to us; and as we did not yet know the boundaries of our estate
      very accurately, we took their word for it and paid damages. Afterwards it
      turned out that there had been no mistake at the mowing. They barked the
      lime-trees in our wood. One of the Dubetchnya peasants, a regular shark,
      who did a trade in vodka without a licence, bribed our labourers, and in
      collaboration with them cheated us in a most treacherous way. They took
      the new wheels off our carts and replaced them with old ones, stole our
      ploughing harness and actually sold them to us, and so on. But what was
      most mortifying of all was what happened at the building; the peasant
      women stole by night boards, bricks, tiles, pieces of iron. The village
      elder with witnesses made a search in their huts; the village meeting
      fined them two roubles each, and afterwards this money was spent on drink
      by the whole commune.
    

      When Masha heard about this, she would say to the doctor or my sister
      indignantly:
    

      "What beasts! It's awful! awful!"
    

      And I heard her more than once express regret that she had ever taken it
      into her head to build the school.
    

      "You must understand," the doctor tried to persuade her, "that if you
      build this school and do good in general, it's not for the sake of the
      peasants, but in the name of culture, in the name of the future; and the
      worse the peasants are the more reason for building the school. Understand
      that!"
    

      But there was a lack of conviction in his voice, and it seemed to me that
      both he and Masha hated the peasants.
    

      Masha often went to the mill, taking my sister with her, and they both
      said, laughing, that they went to have a look at Stepan, he was so
      handsome. Stepan, it appeared, was torpid and taciturn only with men; in
      feminine society his manners were free and easy, and he talked
      incessantly. One day, going down to the river to bathe, I accidentally
      overheard a conversation. Masha and Kleopatra, both in white dresses, were
      sitting on the bank in the spreading shade of a willow, and Stepan was
      standing by them with his hands behind his back, and was saying:
    

      "Are peasants men? They are not men, but, asking your pardon, wild beasts,
      impostors. What life has a peasant? Nothing but eating and drinking; all
      he cares for is victuals to be cheaper and swilling liquor at the tavern
      like a fool; and there's no conversation, no manners, no formality,
      nothing but ignorance! He lives in filth, his wife lives in filth, and his
      children live in filth. What he stands up in, he lies down to sleep in; he
      picks the potatoes out of the soup with his fingers; he drinks kvass with
      a cockroach in it, and doesn't bother to blow it away!"
    

      "It's their poverty, of course," my sister put in.
    

      "Poverty? There is want to be sure, there's different sorts of want,
      Madam. If a man is in prison, or let us say blind or crippled, that really
      is trouble I wouldn't wish anyone, but if a man's free and has all his
      senses, if he has his eyes and his hands and his strength and God, what
      more does he want? It's cockering themselves, and it's ignorance, Madam,
      it's not poverty. If you, let us suppose, good gentlefolk, by your
      education, wish out of kindness to help him he will drink away your money
      in his low way; or, what's worse, he will open a drinkshop, and with your
      money start robbing the people. You say poverty, but does the rich peasant
      live better? He, too, asking your pardon, lives like a swine: coarse,
      loud-mouthed, cudgel-headed, broader than he is long, fat, red-faced mug,
      I'd like to swing my fist and send him flying, the scoundrel. There's
      Larion, another rich one at Dubetchnya, and I bet he strips the bark off
      your trees as much as any poor one; and he is a foul-mouthed fellow; his
      children are the same, and when he has had a drop too much he'll topple
      with his nose in a puddle and sleep there. They are all a worthless lot,
      Madam. If you live in a village with them it is like hell. It has stuck in
      my teeth, that village has, and thank the Lord, the King of Heaven, I've
      plenty to eat and clothes to wear, I served out my time in the dragoons, I
      was village elder for three years, and now I am a free Cossack, I live
      where I like. I don't want to live in the village, and no one has the
      right to force me. They say-my wife. They say you are bound to live in
      your cottage with your wife. But why so? I am not her hired man."
    

      "Tell me, Stepan, did you marry for love?" asked Masha.
    

      "Love among us in the village!" answered Stepan, and he gave a laugh.
      "Properly speaking, Madam, if you care to know, this is my second
      marriage. I am not a Kurilovka man, I am from Zalegoshtcho, but afterwards
      I was taken into Kurilovka when I married. You see my father did not want
      to divide the land among us. There were five of us brothers. I took my
      leave and went to another village to live with my wife's family, but my
      first wife died when she was young."
    

      "What did she die of?"
    

      "Of foolishness. She used to cry and cry and cry for no reason, and so she
      pined away. She was always drinking some sort of herbs to make her better
      looking, and I suppose she damaged her inside. And my second wife is a
      Kurilovka woman too, there is nothing in her. She's a village woman, a
      peasant woman, and nothing more. I was taken in when they plighted me to
      her. I thought she was young and fair-skinned, and that they lived in a
      clean way. Her mother was just like a Flagellant and she drank coffee, and
      the chief thing, to be sure, they were clean in their ways. So I married
      her, and next day we sat down to dinner; I bade my mother-in-law give me a
      spoon, and she gives me a spoon, and I see her wipe it out with her
      finger. So much for you, thought I; nice sort of cleanliness yours is. I
      lived a year with them and then I went away. I might have married a girl
      from the town," he went on after a pause. "They say a wife is a helpmate
      to her husband. What do I want with a helpmate? I help myself; I'd rather
      she talked to me, and not clack, clack, clack, but circumstantially,
      feelingly. What is life without good conversation?"
    

      Stepan suddenly paused, and at once there was the sound of his dreary,
      monotonous "oo-loo-loo-loo." This meant that he had seen me.
    

      Masha used often to go to the mill, and evidently found pleasure in her
      conversations with Stepan. Stepan abused the peasants with such sincerity
      and conviction, and she was attracted to him. Every time she came back
      from the mill the feeble-minded peasant, who looked after the garden,
      shouted at her:
    

      "Wench Palashka! Hulla, wench Palashka!" and he would bark like a dog:
      "Ga! Ga!"
    

      And she would stop and look at him attentively, as though in that idiot's
      barking she found an answer to her thoughts, and probably he attracted her
      in the same way as Stepan's abuse. At home some piece of news would await
      her, such, for instance, as that the geese from the village had ruined our
      cabbage in the garden, or that Larion had stolen the reins; and shrugging
      her shoulders, she would say with a laugh:
    

      "What do you expect of these people?"
    

      She was indignant, and there was rancour in her heart, and meanwhile I was
      growing used to the peasants, and I felt more and more drawn to them. For
      the most part they were nervous, irritable, downtrodden people; they were
      people whose imagination had been stifled, ignorant, with a poor, dingy
      outlook on life, whose thoughts were ever the same-of the grey earth, of
      grey days, of black bread, people who cheated, but like birds hiding
      nothing but their head behind the tree-people who could not count. They
      would not come to mow for us for twenty roubles, but they came for half a
      pail of vodka, though for twenty roubles they could have bought four
      pails. There really was filth and drunkenness and foolishness and deceit,
      but with all that one yet felt that the life of the peasants rested on a
      firm, sound foundation. However uncouth a wild animal the peasant
      following the plough seemed, and however he might stupefy himself with
      vodka, still, looking at him more closely, one felt that there was in him
      what was needed, something very important, which was lacking in Masha and
      in the doctor, for instance, and that was that he believed the chief thing
      on earth was truth and justice, and that his salvation, and that of the
      whole people, was only to be found in truth and justice, and so more than
      anything in the world he loved just dealing. I told my wife she saw the
      spots on the glass, but not the glass itself; she said nothing in reply,
      or hummed like Stepan "oo-loo-loo-loo." When this good-hearted and clever
      woman turned pale with indignation, and with a quiver in her voice spoke
      to the doctor of the drunkenness and dishonesty, it perplexed me, and I
      was struck by the shortness of her memory. How could she forget that her
      father the engineer drank too, and drank heavily, and that the money with
      which Dubetchnya had been bought had been acquired by a whole series of
      shameless, impudent dishonesties? How could she forget it?
    

      XIV
    

      My sister, too, was leading a life of her own which she carefully hid from
      me. She was often whispering with Masha. When I went up to her she seemed
      to shrink into herself, and there was a guilty, imploring look in her
      eyes; evidently there was something going on in her heart of which she was
      afraid or ashamed. So as to avoid meeting me in the garden, or being left
      alone with me, she always kept close to Masha, and I rarely had an
      opportunity of talking to her except at dinner.
    

      One evening I was walking quietly through the garden on my way back from
      the building. It was beginning to get dark. Without noticing me, or
      hearing my step, my sister was walking near a spreading old apple-tree,
      absolutely noiselessly as though she were a phantom. She was dressed in
      black, and was walking rapidly backwards and forwards on the same track,
      looking at the ground. An apple fell from the tree; she started at the
      sound, stood still and pressed her hands to her temples. At that moment I
      went up to her.
    

      In a rush of tender affection which suddenly flooded my heart, with tears
      in my eyes, suddenly remembering my mother and our childhood, I put my arm
      round her shoulders and kissed her.
    

      "What is the matter?" I asked her. "You are unhappy; I have seen it for a
      long time. Tell me what's wrong?"
    

      "I am frightened," she said, trembling.
    

      "What is it?" I insisted. "For God's sake, be open!"
    

      "I will, I will be open; I will tell you the whole truth. To hide it from
      you is so hard, so agonizing. Misail, I love . . ." she went on in a
      whisper, "I love him . . . I love him. . . . I am happy, but why am I so
      frightened?"
    

      There was the sound of footsteps; between the trees appeared Dr. Blagovo
      in his silk shirt with his high top boots. Evidently they had arranged to
      meet near the apple-tree. Seeing him, she rushed impulsively towards him
      with a cry of pain as though he were being taken from her.
    

      "Vladimir! Vladimir!"
    

      She clung to him and looked greedily into his face, and only then I
      noticed how pale and thin she had become of late. It was particularly
      noticeable from her lace collar which I had known for so long, and which
      now hung more loosely than ever before about her thin, long neck. The
      doctor was disconcerted, but at once recovered himself, and, stroking her
      hair, said:
    

      "There, there. . . . Why so nervous? You see, I'm here."
    

      We were silent, looking with embarrassment at each other, then we walked
      on, the three of us together, and I heard the doctor say to me:
    

      "Civilized life has not yet begun among us. Old men console themselves by
      making out that if there is nothing now, there was something in the
      forties or the sixties; that's the old: you and I are young; our brains
      have not yet been touched by marasmus senilis; we cannot comfort
      ourselves with such illusions. The beginning of Russia was in 862, but the
      beginning of civilized Russia has not come yet."
    

      But I did not grasp the meaning of these reflections. It was somehow
      strange, I could not believe it, that my sister was in love, that she was
      walking and holding the arm of a stranger and looking tenderly at him. My
      sister, this nervous, frightened, crushed, fettered creature, loved a man
      who was married and had children! I felt sorry for something, but what
      exactly I don't know; the presence of the doctor was for some reason
      distasteful to me now, and I could not imagine what would come of this
      love of theirs.
    

      XV
    

      Masha and I drove to Kurilovka to the dedication of the school.
    

      "Autumn, autumn, autumn, . . ." said Masha softly, looking away. "Summer
      is over. There are no birds and nothing is green but the willows."
    

      Yes, summer was over. There were fine, warm days, but it was fresh in the
      morning, and the shepherds went out in their sheepskins already; and in
      our garden the dew did not dry off the asters all day long. There were
      plaintive sounds all the time, and one could not make out whether they
      came from the shutters creaking on their rusty hinges, or from the flying
      cranes-and one's heart felt light, and one was eager for life.
    

      "The summer is over," said Masha. "Now you and I can balance our accounts.
      We have done a lot of work, a lot of thinking; we are the better for
      it-all honour and glory to us-we have succeeded in self-improvement; but
      have our successes had any perceptible influence on the life around us,
      have they brought any benefit to anyone whatever? No. Ignorance, physical
      uncleanliness, drunkenness, an appallingly high infant mortality,
      everything remains as it was, and no one is the better for your having
      ploughed and sown, and my having wasted money and read books. Obviously we
      have been working only for ourselves and have had advanced ideas only for
      ourselves." Such reasonings perplexed me, and I did not know what to
      think.
    

      "We have been sincere from beginning to end," said I, "and if anyone is
      sincere he is right."
    

      "Who disputes it? We were right, but we haven't succeeded in properly
      accomplishing what we were right in. To begin with, our external methods
      themselves-aren't they mistaken? You want to be of use to men, but by the
      very fact of your buying an estate, from the very start you cut yourself
      off from any possibility of doing anything useful for them. Then if you
      work, dress, eat like a peasant you sanctify, as it were, by your
      authority, their heavy, clumsy dress, their horrible huts, their stupid
      beards. . . . On the other hand, if we suppose that you work for long,
      long years, your whole life, that in the end some practical results are
      obtained, yet what are they, your results, what can they do against such
      elemental forces as wholesale ignorance, hunger, cold, degeneration? A
      drop in the ocean! Other methods of struggle are needed, strong, bold,
      rapid! If one really wants to be of use one must get out of the narrow
      circle of ordinary social work, and try to act direct upon the mass! What
      is wanted, first of all, is a loud, energetic propaganda. Why is it that
      art-music, for instance-is so living, so popular, and in reality so
      powerful? Because the musician or the singer affects thousands at once.
      Precious, precious art!" she went on, looking dreamily at the sky. "Art
      gives us wings and carries us far, far away! Anyone who is sick of filth,
      of petty, mercenary interests, anyone who is revolted, wounded, and
      indignant, can find peace and satisfaction only in the beautiful."
    

      When we drove into Kurilovka the weather was bright and joyous. Somewhere
      they were threshing; there was a smell of rye straw. A mountain ash was
      bright red behind the hurdle fences, and all the trees wherever one looked
      were ruddy or golden. They were ringing the bells, they were carrying the
      ikons to the school, and we could hear them sing: "Holy Mother, our
      Defender," and how limpid the air was, and how high the doves were flying.
    

      The service was being held in the classroom. Then the peasants of
      Kurilovka brought Masha the ikon, and the peasants of Dubetchnya offered
      her a big loaf and a gilt salt cellar. And Masha broke into sobs.
    

      "If anything has been said that shouldn't have been or anything done not
      to your liking, forgive us," said an old man, and he bowed down to her and
      to me.
    

      As we drove home Masha kept looking round at the school; the green roof,
      which I had painted, and which was glistening in the sun, remained in
      sight for a long while. And I felt that the look Masha turned upon it now
      was one of farewell.
    

      XVI
    

      In the evening she got ready to go to the town. Of late she had taken to
      going often to the town and staying the night there. In her absence I
      could not work, my hands felt weak and limp; our huge courtyard seemed a
      dreary, repulsive, empty hole. The garden was full of angry noises, and
      without her the house, the trees, the horses were no longer "ours."
    

      I did not go out of the house, but went on sitting at her table beside her
      bookshelf with the books on land work, those old favourites no longer
      wanted and looking at me now so shamefacedly. For whole hours together,
      while it struck seven, eight, nine, while the autumn night, black as soot,
      came on outside, I kept examining her old glove, or the pen with which she
      always wrote, or her little scissors. I did nothing, and realized clearly
      that all I had done before, ploughing, mowing, chopping, had only been
      because she wished it. And if she had sent me to clean a deep well, where
      I had to stand up to my waist in deep water, I should have crawled into
      the well without considering whether it was necessary or not. And now when
      she was not near, Dubetchnya, with its ruins, its untidiness, its banging
      shutters, with its thieves by day and by night, seemed to me a chaos in
      which any work would be useless. Besides, what had I to work for here, why
      anxiety and thought about the future, if I felt that the earth was giving
      way under my feet, that I had played my part in Dubetchnya, and that the
      fate of the books on farming was awaiting me too? Oh, what misery it was
      at night, in hours of solitude, when I was listening every minute in
      alarm, as though I were expecting someone to shout that it was time for me
      to go away! I did not grieve for Dubetchnya. I grieved for my love which,
      too, was threatened with its autumn. What an immense happiness it is to
      love and be loved, and how awful to feel that one is slipping down from
      that high pinnacle!
    

      Masha returned from the town towards the evening of the next day. She was
      displeased with something, but she concealed it, and only said, why was it
      all the window frames had been put in for the winter it was enough to
      suffocate one. I took out two frames. We were not hungry, but we sat down
      to supper.
    

      "Go and wash your hands," said my wife; "you smell of putty."
    

      She had brought some new illustrated papers from the town, and we looked
      at them together after supper. There were supplements with fashion plates
      and patterns. Masha looked through them casually, and was putting them
      aside to examine them properly later on; but one dress, with a flat skirt
      as full as a bell and large sleeves, interested her, and she looked at it
      for a minute gravely and attentively.
    

      "That's not bad," she said.
    

      "Yes, that dress would suit you beautifully," I said, "beautifully."
    

      And looking with emotion at the dress, admiring that patch of grey simply
      because she liked it, I went on tenderly:
    

      "A charming, exquisite dress! Splendid, glorious, Masha! My precious
      Masha!"
    

      And tears dropped on the fashion plate.
    

      "Splendid Masha . . ." I muttered; "sweet, precious Masha. . . ."
    

      She went to bed, while I sat another hour looking at the illustrations.
    

      "It's a pity you took out the window frames," she said from the bedroom,
      "I am afraid it may be cold. Oh, dear, what a draught there is!"
    

      I read something out of the column of odds and ends, a receipt for making
      cheap ink, and an account of the biggest diamond in the world. I came
      again upon the fashion plate of the dress she liked, and I imagined her at
      a ball, with a fan, bare shoulders, brilliant, splendid, with a full
      understanding of painting, music, literature, and how small and how brief
      my part seemed!
    

      Our meeting, our marriage, had been only one of the episodes of which
      there would be many more in the life of this vital, richly gifted woman.
      All the best in the world, as I have said already, was at her service, and
      she received it absolutely for nothing, and even ideas and the
      intellectual movement in vogue served simply for her recreation, giving
      variety to her life, and I was only the sledge-driver who drove her from
      one entertainment to another. Now she did not need me. She would take
      flight, and I should be alone.
    

      And as though in response to my thought, there came a despairing scream
      from the garden.
    

      "He-e-elp!"
    

      It was a shrill, womanish voice, and as though to mimic it the wind
      whistled in the chimney on the same shrill note. Half a minute passed, and
      again through the noise of the wind, but coming, it seemed, from the other
      end of the yard:
    

      "He-e-elp!"
    

      "Misail, do you hear?" my wife asked me softly. "Do you hear?"
    

      She came out from the bedroom in her nightgown, with her hair down, and
      listened, looking at the dark window.
    

      "Someone is being murdered," she said. "That is the last straw."
    

      I took my gun and went out. It was very dark outside, the wind was high,
      and it was difficult to stand. I went to the gate and listened, the trees
      roared, the wind whistled and, probably at the feeble-minded peasant's, a
      dog howled lazily. Outside the gates the darkness was absolute, not a
      light on the railway-line. And near the lodge, which a year before had
      been the office, suddenly sounded a smothered scream:
    

      "He-e-elp!"
    

      "Who's there?" I called.
    

      There were two people struggling. One was thrusting the other out, while
      the other was resisting, and both were breathing heavily.
    

      "Leave go," said one, and I recognized Ivan Tcheprakov; it was he who was
      shrieking in a shrill, womanish voice: "Let go, you damned brute, or I'll
      bite your hand off."
    

      The other I recognized as Moisey. I separated them, and as I did so I
      could not resist hitting Moisey two blows in the face. He fell down, then
      got up again, and I hit him once more.
    

      "He tried to kill me," he muttered. "He was trying to get at his mamma's
      chest. . . . I want to lock him up in the lodge for security."
    

      Tcheprakov was drunk and did not recognize me; he kept drawing deep
      breaths, as though he were just going to shout "help" again.
    

      I left them and went back to the house; my wife was lying on her bed; she
      had dressed. I told her what had happened in the yard, and did not conceal
      the fact that I had hit Moisey.
    

      "It's terrible to live in the country," she said.
    

      "And what a long night it is. Oh dear, if only it were over!"
    

      "He-e-elp!" we heard again, a little later.
    

      "I'll go and stop them," I said.
    

      "No, let them bite each other's throats," she said with an expression of
      disgust.
    

      She was looking up at the ceiling, listening, while I sat beside her, not
      daring to speak to her, feeling as though I were to blame for their
      shouting "help" in the yard and for the night's seeming so long.
    

      We were silent, and I waited impatiently for a gleam of light at the
      window, and Masha looked all the time as though she had awakened from a
      trance and now was marvelling how she, so clever, and well-educated, so
      elegant, had come into this pitiful, provincial, empty hole among a crew
      of petty, insignificant people, and how she could have so far forgotten
      herself as ever to be attracted by one of these people, and for more than
      six months to have been his wife. It seemed to me that at that moment it
      did not matter to her whether it was I, or Moisey, or Tcheprakov;
      everything for her was merged in that savage drunken "help"-I and our
      marriage, and our work together, and the mud and slush of autumn, and when
      she sighed or moved into a more comfortable position I read in her face:
      "Oh, that morning would come quickly!"
    

      In the morning she went away. I spent another three days at Dubetchnya
      expecting her, then I packed all our things in one room, locked it, and
      walked to the town. It was already evening when I rang at the engineer's,
      and the street lamps were burning in Great Dvoryansky Street. Pavel told
      me there was no one at home; Viktor Ivanitch had gone to Petersburg, and
      Mariya Viktorovna was probably at the rehearsal at the Azhogins'. I
      remember with what emotion I went on to the Azhogins', how my heart
      throbbed and fluttered as I mounted the stairs, and stood waiting a long
      while on the landing at the top, not daring to enter that temple of the
      muses! In the big room there were lighted candles everywhere, on a little
      table, on the piano, and on the stage, everywhere in threes; and the first
      performance was fixed for the thirteenth, and now the first rehearsal was
      on a Monday, an unlucky day. All part of the war against superstition! All
      the devotees of the scenic art were gathered together; the eldest, the
      middle, and the youngest sisters were walking about the stage, reading
      their parts in exercise books. Apart from all the rest stood Radish,
      motionless, with the side of his head pressed to the wall as he gazed with
      adoration at the stage, waiting for the rehearsal to begin. Everything as
      it used to be.
    

      I was making my way to my hostess; I had to pay my respects to her, but
      suddenly everyone said "Hush!" and waved me to step quietly. There was a
      silence. The lid of the piano was raised; a lady sat down at it screwing
      up her short-sighted eyes at the music, and my Masha walked up to the
      piano, in a low-necked dress, looking beautiful, but with a special, new
      sort of beauty not in the least like the Masha who used to come and meet
      me in the spring at the mill. She sang: "Why do I love the radiant night?"
    

      It was the first time during our whole acquaintance that I had heard her
      sing. She had a fine, mellow, powerful voice, and while she sang I felt as
      though I were eating a ripe, sweet, fragrant melon. She ended, the
      audience applauded, and she smiled, very much pleased, making play with
      her eyes, turning over the music, smoothing her skirts, like a bird that
      has at last broken out of its cage and preens its wings in freedom. Her
      hair was arranged over her ears, and she had an unpleasant, defiant
      expression in her face, as though she wanted to throw down a challenge to
      us all, or to shout to us as she did to her horses: "Hey, there, my
      beauties!"
    

      And she must at that moment have been very much like her grandfather the
      sledge-driver.
    

      "You here too?" she said, giving me her hand. "Did you hear me sing? Well,
      what did you think of it?" and without waiting for my answer she went on:
      "It's a very good thing you are here. I am going to-night to Petersburg
      for a short time. You'll let me go, won't you?"
    

      At midnight I went with her to the station. She embraced me
      affectionately, probably feeling grateful to me for not asking unnecessary
      questions, and she promised to write to me, and I held her hands a long
      time, and kissed them, hardly able to restrain my tears and not uttering a
      word.
    

      And when she had gone I stood watching the retreating lights, caressing
      her in imagination and softly murmuring:
    

      "My darling Masha, glorious Masha. . . ."
    

      I spent the night at Karpovna's, and next morning I was at work with
      Radish, re-covering the furniture of a rich merchant who was marrying his
      daughter to a doctor.
    

      XVII
    

      My sister came after dinner on Sunday and had tea with me.
    

      "I read a great deal now," she said, showing me the books which she had
      fetched from the public library on her way to me. "Thanks to your wife and
      to Vladimir, they have awakened me to self-realization. They have been my
      salvation; they have made me feel myself a human being. In old days I used
      to lie awake at night with worries of all sorts, thinking what a lot of
      sugar we had used in the week, or hoping the cucumbers would not be too
      salt. And now, too, I lie awake at night, but I have different thoughts. I
      am distressed that half my life has been passed in such a foolish,
      cowardly way. I despise my past; I am ashamed of it. And I look upon our
      father now as my enemy. Oh, how grateful I am to your wife! And Vladimir!
      He is such a wonderful person! They have opened my eyes!"
    

      "That's bad that you don't sleep at night," I said.
    

      "Do you think I am ill? Not at all. Vladimir sounded me, and said I was
      perfectly well. But health is not what matters, it is not so important.
      Tell me: am I right?"
    

      She needed moral support, that was obvious. Masha had gone away. Dr.
      Blagovo was in Petersburg, and there was no one left in the town but me,
      to tell her she was right. She looked intently into my face, trying to
      read my secret thoughts, and if I were absorbed or silent in her presence
      she thought this was on her account, and was grieved. I always had to be
      on my guard, and when she asked me whether she was right I hastened to
      assure her that she was right, and that I had a deep respect for her.
    

      "Do you know they have given me a part at the Azhogins'?" she went on. "I
      want to act on the stage, I want to live-in fact, I mean to drain the full
      cup. I have no talent, none, and the part is only ten lines, but still
      this is immeasurably finer and loftier than pouring out tea five times a
      day, and looking to see if the cook has eaten too much. Above all, let my
      father see I am capable of protest."
    

      After tea she lay down on my bed, and lay for a little while with her eyes
      closed, looking very pale.
    

      "What weakness," she said, getting up. "Vladimir says all city-bred women
      and girls are anÃ¦mic from doing nothing. What a clever man Vladimir is! He
      is right, absolutely right. We must work!"
    

      Two days later she came to the Azhogins' with her manuscript for the
      rehearsal. She was wearing a black dress with a string of coral round her
      neck, and a brooch that in the distance was like a pastry puff, and in her
      ears earrings sparkling with brilliants. When I looked at her I felt
      uncomfortable. I was struck by her lack of taste. That she had very
      inappropriately put on earrings and brilliants, and that she was strangely
      dressed, was remarked by other people too; I saw smiles on people's faces,
      and heard someone say with a laugh: "Kleopatra of Egypt."
    

      She was trying to assume society manners, to be unconstrained and at her
      ease, and so seemed artificial and strange. She had lost simplicity and
      sweetness.
    

      "I told father just now that I was going to the rehearsal," she began,
      coming up to me, "and he shouted that he would not give me his blessing,
      and actually almost struck me. Only fancy, I don't know my part," she
      said, looking at her manuscript. "I am sure to make a mess of it. So be
      it, the die is cast," she went on in intense excitement. "The die is cast.
      . . ."
    

      It seemed to her that everyone was looking at her, and that all were
      amazed at the momentous step she had taken, that everyone was expecting
      something special of her, and it would have been impossible to convince
      her that no one was paying attention to people so petty and insignificant
      as she and I were.
    

      She had nothing to do till the third act, and her part, that of a visitor,
      a provincial crony, consisted only in standing at the door as though
      listening, and then delivering a brief monologue. In the interval before
      her appearance, an hour and a half at least, while they were moving about
      on the stage reading their parts, drinking tea and arguing, she did not
      leave my side, and was all the time muttering her part and nervously
      crumpling up the manuscript. And imagining that everyone was looking at
      her and waiting for her appearance, with a trembling hand she smoothed
      back her hair and said to me:
    

      "I shall certainly make a mess of it. . . . What a load on my heart, if
      only you knew! I feel frightened, as though I were just going to be led to
      execution."
    

      At last her turn came.
    

      "Kleopatra Alexyevna, it's your cue!" said the stage manager.
    

      She came forward into the middle of the stage with an expression of horror
      on her face, looking ugly and angular, and for half a minute stood as
      though in a trance, perfectly motionless, and only her big earrings shook
      in her ears.
    

      "The first time you can read it," said someone.
    

      It was clear to me that she was trembling, and trembling so much that she
      could not speak, and could not unfold her manuscript, and that she was
      incapable of acting her part; and I was already on the point of going to
      her and saying something, when she suddenly dropped on her knees in the
      middle of the stage and broke into loud sobs.
    

      All was commotion and hubbub. I alone stood still, leaning against the
      side scene, overwhelmed by what had happened, not understanding and not
      knowing what to do. I saw them lift her up and lead her away. I saw Anyuta
      Blagovo come up to me; I had not seen her in the room before, and she
      seemed to have sprung out of the earth. She was wearing her hat and veil,
      and, as always, had an air of having come only for a moment.
    

      "I told her not to take a part," she said angrily, jerking out each word
      abruptly and turning crimson. "It's insanity! You ought to have prevented
      her!"
    

      Madame Azhogin, in a short jacket with short sleeves, with cigarette ash
      on her breast, looking thin and flat, came rapidly towards me.
    

      "My dear, this is terrible," she brought out, wringing her hands, and, as
      her habit was, looking intently into my face. "This is terrible! Your
      sister is in a condition. . . . She is with child. Take her away, I
      implore you. . . ."
    

      She was breathless with agitation, while on one side stood her three
      daughters, exactly like her, thin and flat, huddling together in a scared
      way. They were alarmed, overwhelmed, as though a convict had been caught
      in their house. What a disgrace, how dreadful! And yet this estimable
      family had spent its life waging war on superstition; evidently they
      imagined that all the superstition and error of humanity was limited to
      the three candles, the thirteenth of the month, and to the unluckiness of
      Monday!
    

      "I beg you. . . I beg," repeated Madame Azhogin, pursing up her lips in
      the shape of a heart on the syllable "you." "I beg you to take her home."
    

      XVIII
    

      A little later my sister and I were walking along the street. I covered
      her with the skirts of my coat; we hastened, choosing back streets where
      there were no street lamps, avoiding passers-by; it was as though we were
      running away. She was no longer crying, but looked at me with dry eyes. To
      Karpovna's, where I took her, it was only twenty minutes' walk, and,
      strange to say, in that short time we succeeded in thinking of our whole
      life; we talked over everything, considered our position, reflected. . . .
    

      We decided we could not go on living in this town, and that when I had
      earned a little money we would move to some other place. In some houses
      everyone was asleep, in others they were playing cards; we hated these
      houses; we were afraid of them. We talked of the fanaticism, the
      coarseness of feeling, the insignificance of these respectable families,
      these amateurs of dramatic art whom we had so alarmed, and I kept asking
      in what way these stupid, cruel, lazy, and dishonest people were superior
      to the drunken and superstitious peasants of Kurilovka, or in what way
      they were better than animals, who in the same way are thrown into a panic
      when some incident disturbs the monotony of their life limited by their
      instincts. What would have happened to my sister now if she had been left
      to live at home?
    

      What moral agonies would she have experienced, talking with my father,
      meeting every day with acquaintances? I imagined this to myself, and at
      once there came into my mind people, all people I knew, who had been
      slowly done to death by their nearest relations. I remembered the tortured
      dogs, driven mad, the live sparrows plucked naked by boys and flung into
      the water, and a long, long series of obscure lingering miseries which I
      had looked on continually from early childhood in that town; and I could
      not understand what these sixty thousand people lived for, what they read
      the gospel for, why they prayed, why they read books and magazines. What
      good had they gained from all that had been said and written hitherto if
      they were still possessed by the same spiritual darkness and hatred of
      liberty, as they were a hundred and three hundred years ago? A master
      carpenter spends his whole life building houses in the town, and always,
      to the day of his death, calls a "gallery" a "galdery." So these sixty
      thousand people have been reading and hearing of truth, of justice, of
      mercy, of freedom for generations, and yet from morning till night, till
      the day of their death, they are lying, and tormenting each other, and
      they fear liberty and hate it as a deadly foe.
    

      "And so my fate is decided," said my sister, as we arrived home. "After
      what has happened I cannot go back there. Heavens, how good that
      is! My heart feels lighter."
    

      She went to bed at once. Tears were glittering on her eyelashes, but her
      expression was happy; she fell into a sound sweet sleep, and one could see
      that her heart was lighter and that she was resting. It was a long, long
      time since she had slept like that.
    

      And so we began our life together. She was always singing and saying that
      her life was very happy, and the books I brought her from the public
      library I took back unread, as now she could not read; she wanted to do
      nothing but dream and talk of the future, mending my linen, or helping
      Karpovna near the stove; she was always singing, or talking of her
      Vladimir, of his cleverness, of his charming manners, of his kindness, of
      his extraordinary learning, and I assented to all she said, though by now
      I disliked her doctor. She wanted to work, to lead an independent life on
      her own account, and she used to say that she would become a
      school-teacher or a doctor's assistant as soon as her health would permit
      her, and would herself do the scrubbing and the washing. Already she was
      passionately devoted to her child; he was not yet born, but she knew
      already the colour of his eyes, what his hands would be like, and how he
      would laugh. She was fond of talking about education, and as her Vladimir
      was the best man in the world, all her discussion of education could be
      summed up in the question how to make the boy as fascinating as his
      father. There was no end to her talk, and everything she said made her
      intensely joyful. Sometimes I was delighted, too, though I could not have
      said why.
    

      I suppose her dreaminess infected me. I, too, gave up reading, and did
      nothing but dream. In the evenings, in spite of my fatigue, I walked up
      and down the room, with my hands in my pockets, talking of Masha.
    

      "What do you think?" I would ask of my sister. "When will she come back? I
      think she'll come back at Christmas, not later; what has she to do there?"
    

      "As she doesn't write to you, it's evident she will come back very soon."
    

      "That's true," I assented, though I knew perfectly well that Masha would
      not return to our town.
    

      I missed her fearfully, and could no longer deceive myself, and tried to
      get other people to deceive me. My sister was expecting her doctor, and
      I-Masha; and both of us talked incessantly, laughed, and did not notice
      that we were preventing Karpovna from sleeping. She lay on the stove and
      kept muttering:
    

      "The samovar hummed this morning, it did hum! Oh, it bodes no good, my
      dears, it bodes no good!"
    

      No one ever came to see us but the postman, who brought my sister letters
      from the doctor, and Prokofy, who sometimes came in to see us in the
      evening, and after looking at my sister without speaking went away, and
      when he was in the kitchen said:
    

      "Every class ought to remember its rules, and anyone, who is so proud that
      he won't understand that, will find it a vale of tears."
    

      He was very fond of the phrase "a vale of tears." One day-it was in
      Christmas week, when I was walking by the bazaar-he called me into the
      butcher's shop, and not shaking hands with me, announced that he had to
      speak to me about something very important. His face was red from the
      frost and vodka; near him, behind the counter, stood Nikolka, with the
      expression of a brigand, holding a bloodstained knife in his hand.
    

      "I desire to express my word to you," Prokofy began. "This incident cannot
      continue, because, as you understand yourself that for such a vale, people
      will say nothing good of you or of us. Mamma, through pity, cannot say
      something unpleasant to you, that your sister should move into another
      lodging on account of her condition, but I won't have it any more, because
      I can't approve of her behaviour."
    

      I understood him, and I went out of the shop. The same day my sister and I
      moved to Radish's. We had no money for a cab, and we walked on foot; I
      carried a parcel of our belongings on my back; my sister had nothing in
      her hands, but she gasped for breath and coughed, and kept asking whether
      we should get there soon.
    

      XIX
    

      At last a letter came from Masha.
    

      "Dear, good M. A." (she wrote), "our kind, gentle 'angel' as the old
      painter calls you, farewell; I am going with my father to America for the
      exhibition. In a few days I shall see the ocean-so far from Dubetchnya,
      it's dreadful to think! It's far and unfathomable as the sky, and I long
      to be there in freedom. I am triumphant, I am mad, and you see how
      incoherent my letter is. Dear, good one, give me my freedom, make haste to
      break the thread, which still holds, binding you and me together. My
      meeting and knowing you was a ray from heaven that lighted up my
      existence; but my becoming your wife was a mistake, you understand that,
      and I am oppressed now by the consciousness of the mistake, and I beseech
      you, on my knees, my generous friend, quickly, quickly, before I start for
      the ocean, telegraph that you consent to correct our common mistake, to
      remove the solitary stone from my wings, and my father, who will undertake
      all the arrangements, promised me not to burden you too much with
      formalities. And so I am free to fly whither I will? Yes?
    

      "Be happy, and God bless you; forgive me, a sinner.
    

      "I am well, I am wasting money, doing all sorts of silly things, and I
      thank God every minute that such a bad woman as I has no children. I sing
      and have success, but it's not an infatuation; no, it's my haven, my cell
      to which I go for peace. King David had a ring with an inscription on it:
      'All things pass.' When one is sad those words make one cheerful, and when
      one is cheerful it makes one sad. I have got myself a ring like that with
      Hebrew letters on it, and this talisman keeps me from infatuations. All
      things pass, life will pass, one wants nothing. Or at least one wants
      nothing but the sense of freedom, for when anyone is free, he wants
      nothing, nothing, nothing. Break the thread. A warm hug to you and your
      sister. Forgive and forget your M."
    

      My sister used to lie down in one room, and Radish, who had been ill again
      and was now better, in another. Just at the moment when I received this
      letter my sister went softly into the painter's room, sat down beside him
      and began reading aloud. She read to him every day, Ostrovsky or Gogol,
      and he listened, staring at one point, not laughing, but shaking his head
      and muttering to himself from time to time:
    

      "Anything may happen! Anything may happen!"
    

      If anything ugly or unseemly were depicted in the play he would say as
      though vindictively, thrusting his finger into the book:
    

      "There it is, lying! That's what it does, lying does."
    

      The plays fascinated him, both from their subjects and their moral, and
      from their skilful, complex construction, and he marvelled at "him," never
      calling the author by his name. How neatly he has put it all
      together.
    

      This time my sister read softly only one page, and could read no more: her
      voice would not last out. Radish took her hand and, moving his parched
      lips, said, hardly audibly, in a husky voice:
    

      "The soul of a righteous man is white and smooth as chalk, but the soul of
      a sinful man is like pumice stone. The soul of a righteous man is like
      clear oil, but the soul of a sinful man is gas tar. We must labour, we
      must sorrow, we must suffer sickness," he went on, "and he who does not
      labour and sorrow will not gain the Kingdom of Heaven. Woe, woe to them
      that are well fed, woe to the mighty, woe to the rich, woe to the
      moneylenders! Not for them is the Kingdom of Heaven. Lice eat grass, rust
      eats iron. . ."
    

      "And lying the soul," my sister added laughing. I read the letter through
      once more. At that moment there walked into the kitchen a soldier who had
      been bringing us twice a week parcels of tea, French bread and game, which
      smelt of scent, from some unknown giver. I had no work. I had had to sit
      at home idle for whole days together, and probably whoever sent us the
      French bread knew that we were in want.
    

      I heard my sister talking to the soldier and laughing gaily. Then, lying
      down, she ate some French bread and said to me:
    

      "When you wouldn't go into the service, but became a house painter, Anyuta
      Blagovo and I knew from the beginning that you were right, but we were
      frightened to say so aloud. Tell me what force is it that hinders us from
      saying what one thinks? Take Anyuta Blagovo now, for instance. She loves
      you, she adores you, she knows you are right, she loves me too, like a
      sister, and knows that I am right, and I daresay in her soul envies me,
      but some force prevents her from coming to see us, she shuns us, she is
      afraid."
    

      My sister crossed her arms over her breast, and said passionately:
    

      "How she loves you, if only you knew! She has confessed her love to no one
      but me, and then very secretly in the dark. She led me into a dark avenue
      in the garden, and began whispering how precious you were to her. You will
      see, she'll never marry, because she loves you. Are you sorry for her?"
    

      "Yes."
    

      "It's she who has sent the bread. She is absurd really, what is the use of
      being so secret? I used to be absurd and foolish, but now I have got away
      from that and am afraid of nobody. I think and say aloud what I like, and
      am happy. When I lived at home I hadn't a conception of happiness, and now
      I wouldn't change with a queen."
    

      Dr. Blagovo arrived. He had taken his doctor's degree, and was now staying
      in our town with his father; he was taking a rest, and said that he would
      soon go back to Petersburg again. He wanted to study anti-toxins against
      typhus, and, I believe, cholera; he wanted to go abroad to perfect his
      training, and then to be appointed a professor. He had already left the
      army service, and wore a roomy serge reefer jacket, very full trousers,
      and magnificent neckties. My sister was in ecstasies over his scarfpin,
      his studs, and the red silk handkerchief which he wore, I suppose from
      foppishness, sticking out of the breast pocket of his jacket. One day,
      having nothing to do, she and I counted up all the suits we remembered him
      wearing, and came to the conclusion that he had at least ten. It was clear
      that he still loved my sister as before, but he never once even in jest
      spoke of taking her with him to Petersburg or abroad, and I could not
      picture to myself clearly what would become of her if she remained alive
      and what would become of her child. She did nothing but dream endlessly,
      and never thought seriously of the future; she said he might go where he
      liked, and might abandon her even, so long as he was happy himself; that
      what had been was enough for her.
    

      As a rule he used to sound her very carefully on his arrival, and used to
      insist on her taking milk and drops in his presence. It was the same on
      this occasion. He sounded her and made her drink a glass of milk, and
      there was a smell of creosote in our room afterwards.
    

      "That's a good girl," he said, taking the glass from her. "You mustn't
      talk too much now; you've taken to chattering like a magpie of late.
      Please hold your tongue."
    

      She laughed. Then he came into Radish's room where I was sitting and
      affectionately slapped me on the shoulder.
    

      "Well, how goes it, old man?" he said, bending down to the invalid.
    

      "Your honour," said Radish, moving his lips slowly, "your honour, I
      venture to submit. . . . We all walk in the fear of God, we all have to
      die. . . . Permit me to tell you the truth. . . . Your honour, the Kingdom
      of Heaven will not be for you!"
    

      "There's no help for it," the doctor said jestingly; "there must be
      somebody in hell, you know."
    

      And all at once something happened with my consciousness; as though I were
      in a dream, as though I were standing on a winter night in the
      slaughterhouse yard, and Prokofy beside me, smelling of pepper cordial; I
      made an effort to control myself, and rubbed my eyes, and at once it
      seemed to me that I was going along the road to the interview with the
      Governor. Nothing of the sort had happened to me before, or has happened
      to me since, and these strange memories that were like dreams, I ascribed
      to overexhaustion of my nerves. I lived through the scene at the
      slaughterhouse, and the interview with the Governor, and at the same time
      was dimly aware that it was not real.
    

      When I came to myself I saw that I was no longer in the house, but in the
      street, and was standing with the doctor near a lamp-post.
    

      "It's sad, it's sad," he was saying, and tears were trickling down his
      cheeks. "She is in good spirits, she's always laughing and hopeful, but
      her position's hopeless, dear boy. Your Radish hates me, and is always
      trying to make me feel that I have treated her badly. He is right from his
      standpoint, but I have my point of view too; and I shall never regret all
      that has happened. One must love; we ought all to love-oughtn't we? There
      would be no life without love; anyone who fears and avoids love is not
      free."
    

      Little by little he passed to other subjects, began talking of science, of
      his dissertation which had been liked in Petersburg. He was carried away
      by his subject, and no longer thought of my sister, nor of his grief, nor
      of me. Life was of absorbing interest to him. She has America and her ring
      with the inscription on it, I thought, while this fellow has his doctor's
      degree and a professor's chair to look forward to, and only my sister and
      I are left with the old things.
    

      When I said good-bye to him, I went up to the lamp-post and read the
      letter once more. And I remembered, I remembered vividly how that spring
      morning she had come to me at the mill, lain down and covered herself with
      her jacket-she wanted to be like a simple peasant woman. And how, another
      time-it was in the morning also-we drew the net out of the water, and
      heavy drops of rain fell upon us from the riverside willows, and we
      laughed.
    

      It was dark in our house in Great Dvoryansky Street. I got over the fence
      and, as I used to do in the old days, went by the back way to the kitchen
      to borrow a lantern. There was no one in the kitchen. The samovar hissed
      near the stove, waiting for my father. "Who pours out my father's tea
      now?" I thought. Taking the lantern I went out to the shed, built myself
      up a bed of old newspapers and lay down. The hooks on the walls looked
      forbidding, as they used to of old, and their shadows flickered. It was
      cold. I felt that my sister would come in in a minute, and bring me
      supper, but at once I remembered that she was ill and was lying at
      Radish's, and it seemed to me strange that I should have climbed over the
      fence and be lying here in this unheated shed. My mind was in a maze, and
      I saw all sorts of absurd things.
    

      There was a ring. A ring familiar from childhood: first the wire rustled
      against the wall, then a short plaintive ring in the kitchen. It was my
      father come back from the club. I got up and went into the kitchen. Axinya
      the cook clasped her hands on seeing me, and for some reason burst into
      tears.
    

      "My own!" she said softly. "My precious! O Lord!"
    

      And she began crumpling up her apron in her agitation. In the window there
      were standing jars of berries in vodka. I poured myself out a teacupful
      and greedily drank it off, for I was intensely thirsty. Axinya had quite
      recently scrubbed the table and benches, and there was that smell in the
      kitchen which is found in bright, snug kitchens kept by tidy cooks. And
      that smell and the chirp of the cricket used to lure us as children into
      the kitchen, and put us in the mood for hearing fairy tales and playing at
      "Kings" . . .
    

      "Where's Kleopatra?" Axinya asked softly, in a fluster, holding her
      breath; "and where is your cap, my dear? Your wife, you say, has gone to
      Petersburg?"
    

      She had been our servant in our mother's time, and used once to give
      Kleopatra and me our baths, and to her we were still children who had to
      be talked to for their good. For a quarter of an hour or so she laid
      before me all the reflections which she had with the sagacity of an old
      servant been accumulating in the stillness of that kitchen, all the time
      since we had seen each other. She said that the doctor could be forced to
      marry Kleopatra; he only needed to be thoroughly frightened; and that if
      an appeal were promptly written the bishop would annul the first marriage;
      that it would be a good thing for me to sell Dubetchnya without my wife's
      knowledge, and put the money in the bank in my own name; that if my sister
      and I were to bow down at my father's feet and ask him properly, he might
      perhaps forgive us; that we ought to have a service sung to the Queen of
      Heaven. . . .
    

      "Come, go along, my dear, and speak to him," she said, when she heard my
      father's cough. "Go along, speak to him; bow down, your head won't drop
      off."
    

      I went in. My father was sitting at the table sketching a plan of a summer
      villa, with Gothic windows, and with a fat turret like a fireman's watch
      tower-something peculiarly stiff and tasteless. Going into the study I
      stood still where I could see this drawing. I did not know why I had gone
      in to my father, but I remember that when I saw his lean face, his red
      neck, and his shadow on the wall, I wanted to throw myself on his neck,
      and as Axinya had told me, bow down at his feet; but the sight of the
      summer villa with the Gothic windows, and the fat turret, restrained me.
    

      "Good evening," I said.
    

      He glanced at me, and at once dropped his eyes on his drawing.
    

      "What do you want?" he asked, after waiting a little.
    

      "I have come to tell you my sister's very ill. She can't live very long,"
      I added in a hollow voice.
    

      "Well," sighed my father, taking off his spectacles, and laying them on
      the table. "What thou sowest that shalt thou reap. What thou sowest," he
      repeated, getting up from the table, "that shalt thou reap. I ask you to
      remember how you came to me two years ago, and on this very spot I begged
      you, I besought you to give up your errors; I reminded you of your duty,
      of your honour, of what you owed to your forefathers whose traditions we
      ought to preserve as sacred. Did you obey me? You scorned my counsels, and
      obstinately persisted in clinging to your false ideals; worse still you
      drew your sister into the path of error with you, and led her to lose her
      moral principles and sense of shame. Now you are both in a bad way. Well,
      as thou sowest, so shalt thou reap!"
    

      As he said this he walked up and down the room. He probably imagined that
      I had come to him to confess my wrong doings, and he probably expected
      that I should begin begging him to forgive my sister and me. I was cold, I
      was shivering as though I were in a fever, and spoke with difficulty in a
      husky voice.
    

      "And I beg you, too, to remember," I said, "on this very spot I besought
      you to understand me, to reflect, to decide with me how and for what we
      should live, and in answer you began talking about our forefathers, about
      my grandfather who wrote poems. One tells you now that your only daughter
      is hopelessly ill, and you go on again about your forefathers, your
      traditions. . . . And such frivolity in your old age, when death is close
      at hand, and you haven't more than five or ten years left!"
    

      "What have you come here for?" my father asked sternly, evidently offended
      at my reproaching him for his frivolity.
    

      "I don't know. I love you, I am unutterably sorry that we are so far
      apart-so you see I have come. I love you still, but my sister has broken
      with you completely. She does not forgive you, and will never forgive you
      now. Your very name arouses her aversion for the past, for life."
    

      "And who is to blame for it?" cried my father. "It's your fault, you
      scoundrel!"
    

      "Well, suppose it is my fault?" I said. "I admit I have been to blame in
      many things, but why is it that this life of yours, which you think
      binding upon us, too-why is it so dreary, so barren? How is it that in not
      one of these houses you have been building for the last thirty years has
      there been anyone from whom I might have learnt how to live, so as not to
      be to blame? There is not one honest man in the whole town! These houses
      of yours are nests of damnation, where mothers and daughters are made away
      with, where children are tortured. . . . My poor mother!" I went on in
      despair. "My poor sister! One has to stupefy oneself with vodka, with
      cards, with scandal; one must become a scoundrel, a hypocrite, or go on
      drawing plans for years and years, so as not to notice all the horrors
      that lie hidden in these houses. Our town has existed for hundreds of
      years, and all that time it has not produced one man of service to our
      country-not one. You have stifled in the germ everything in the least
      living and bright. It's a town of shopkeepers, publicans, counting-house
      clerks, canting hypocrites; it's a useless, unnecessary town, which not
      one soul would regret if it suddenly sank through the earth."
    

      "I don't want to listen to you, you scoundrel!" said my father, and he
      took up his ruler from the table. "You are drunk. Don't dare come and see
      your father in such a state! I tell you for the last time, and you can
      repeat it to your depraved sister, that you'll get nothing from me, either
      of you. I have torn my disobedient children out of my heart, and if they
      suffer for their disobedience and obstinacy I do not pity them. You can go
      whence you came. It has pleased God to chastise me with you, but I will
      bear the trial with resignation, and, like Job, I will find consolation in
      my sufferings and in unremitting labour. You must not cross my threshold
      till you have mended your ways. I am a just man, all I tell you is for
      your benefit, and if you desire your own good you ought to remember all
      your life what I say and have said to you. . . ."
    

      I waved my hand in despair and went away. I don't remember what happened
      afterwards, that night and next day.
    

      I am told that I walked about the streets bareheaded, staggering, and
      singing aloud, while a crowd of boys ran after me, shouting:
    

      "Better-than-nothing!"
    

      XX
    

      If I wanted to order a ring for myself, the inscription I should choose
      would be: "Nothing passes away." I believe that nothing passes away
      without leaving a trace, and that every step we take, however small, has
      significance for our present and our future existence.
    

      What I have been through has not been for nothing. My great troubles, my
      patience, have touched people's hearts, and now they don't call me
      "Better-than-nothing," they don't laugh at me, and when I walk by the
      shops they don't throw water over me. They have grown used to my being a
      workman, and see nothing strange in my carrying a pail of paint and
      putting in windows, though I am of noble rank; on the contrary, people are
      glad to give me orders, and I am now considered a first-rate workman, and
      the best foreman after Radish, who, though he has regained his health, and
      though, as before, he paints the cupola on the belfry without scaffolding,
      has no longer the force to control the workmen; instead of him I now run
      about the town looking for work, I engage the workmen and pay them, borrow
      money at a high rate of interest, and now that I myself am a contractor, I
      understand how it is that one may have to waste three days racing about
      the town in search of tilers on account of some twopenny-halfpenny job.
      People are civil to me, they address me politely, and in the houses where
      I work, they offer me tea, and send to enquire whether I wouldn't like
      dinner. Children and young girls often come and look at me with curiosity
      and compassion.
    

      One day I was working in the Governor's garden, painting an arbour there
      to look like marble. The Governor, walking in the garden, came up to the
      arbour and, having nothing to do, entered into conversation with me, and I
      reminded him how he had once summoned me to an interview with him. He
      looked into my face intently for a minute, then made his mouth like a
      round "O," flung up his hands, and said: "I don't remember!"
    

      I have grown older, have become silent, stern, and austere, I rarely
      laugh, and I am told that I have grown like Radish, and that like him I
      bore the workmen by my useless exhortations.
    

      Mariya Viktorovna, my former wife, is living now abroad, while her father
      is constructing a railway somewhere in the eastern provinces, and is
      buying estates there. Dr. Blagovo is also abroad. Dubetchnya has passed
      again into the possession of Madame Tcheprakov, who has bought it after
      forcing the engineer to knock the price down twenty per cent. Moisey goes
      about now in a bowler hat; he often drives into the town in a racing
      droshky on business of some sort, and stops near the bank. They say he has
      already bought up a mortgaged estate, and is constantly making enquiries
      at the bank about Dubetchnya, which he means to buy too. Poor Ivan
      Tcheprakov was for a long while out of work, staggering about the town and
      drinking. I tried to get him into our work, and for a time he painted
      roofs and put in window-panes in our company, and even got to like it, and
      stole oil, asked for tips, and drank like a regular painter. But he soon
      got sick of the work, and went back to Dubetchnya, and afterwards the
      workmen confessed to me that he had tried to persuade them to join him one
      night and murder Moisey and rob Madame Tcheprakov.
    

      My father has greatly aged; he is very bent, and in the evenings walks up
      and down near his house. I never go to see him.
    

      During an epidemic of cholera Prokofy doctored some of the shopkeepers
      with pepper cordial and pitch, and took money for doing so, and, as I
      learned from the newspapers, was flogged for abusing the doctors as he sat
      in his shop. His shop boy Nikolka died of cholera. Karpovna is still alive
      and, as always, she loves and fears her Prokofy. When she sees me, she
      always shakes her head mournfully, and says with a sigh: "Your life is
      ruined."
    

      On working days I am busy from morning till night. On holidays, in fine
      weather, I take my tiny niece (my sister reckoned on a boy, but the child
      is a girl) and walk in a leisurely way to the cemetery. There I stand or
      sit down, and stay a long time gazing at the grave that is so dear to me,
      and tell the child that her mother lies here.
    

      Sometimes, by the graveside, I find Anyuta Blagovo. We greet each other
      and stand in silence, or talk of Kleopatra, of her child, of how sad life
      is in this world; then, going out of the cemetery we walk along in silence
      and she slackens her pace on purpose to walk beside me a little longer.
      The little girl, joyous and happy, pulls at her hand, laughing and
      screwing up her eyes in the bright sunlight, and we stand still and join
      in caressing the dear child.
    

      When we reach the town Anyuta Blagovo, agitated and flushing crimson, says
      good-bye to me and walks on alone, austere and respectable. . . . And no
      one who met her could, looking at her, imagine that she had just been
      walking beside me and even caressing the child.
    

      AT A COUNTRY HOUSE
    

      PAVEL ILYITCH RASHEVITCH walked up and down, stepping softly on the floor
      covered with little Russian plaids, and casting a long shadow on the wall
      and ceiling while his guest, Meier, the deputy examining magistrate, sat
      on the sofa with one leg drawn up under him smoking and listening. The
      clock already pointed to eleven, and there were sounds of the table being
      laid in the room next to the study.
    

      "Say what you like," Rashevitch was saying, "from the standpoint of
      fraternity, equality, and the rest of it, Mitka, the swineherd, is perhaps
      a man the same as Goethe and Frederick the Great; but take your stand on a
      scientific basis, have the courage to look facts in the face, and it will
      be obvious to you that blue blood is not a mere prejudice, that it is not
      a feminine invention. Blue blood, my dear fellow, has an historical
      justification, and to refuse to recognize it is, to my thinking, as
      strange as to refuse to recognize the antlers on a stag. One must reckon
      with facts! You are a law student and have confined your attention to the
      humane studies, and you can still flatter yourself with illusions of
      equality, fraternity, and so on; I am an incorrigible Darwinian, and for
      me words such as lineage, aristocracy, noble blood, are not empty sounds."
    

      Rashevitch was roused and spoke with feeling. His eyes sparkled, his
      pince-nez would not stay on his nose, he kept nervously shrugging his
      shoulders and blinking, and at the word "Darwinian" he looked jauntily in
      the looking-glass and combed his grey beard with both hands. He was
      wearing a very short and shabby reefer jacket and narrow trousers; the
      rapidity of his movements, his jaunty air, and his abbreviated jacket all
      seemed out of keeping with him, and his big comely head, with long hair
      suggestive of a bishop or a veteran poet, seemed to have been fixed on to
      the body of a tall, lanky, affected youth. When he stood with his legs
      wide apart, his long shadow looked like a pair of scissors.
    

      He was fond of talking, and he always fancied that he was saying something
      new and original. In the presence of Meier he was conscious of an unusual
      flow of spirits and rush of ideas. He found the examining magistrate
      sympathetic, and was stimulated by his youth, his health, his good
      manners, his dignity, and, above all, by his cordial attitude to himself
      and his family. Rashevitch was not a favourite with his acquaintances; as
      a rule they fought shy of him, and, as he knew, declared that he had
      driven his wife into her grave with his talking, and they called him,
      behind his back, a spiteful creature and a toad. Meier, a man new to the
      district and unprejudiced, visited him often and readily and had even been
      known to say that Rashevitch and his daughters were the only people in the
      district with whom he felt as much at home as with his own people.
      Rashevitch liked him too, because he was a young man who might be a good
      match for his elder daughter, Genya.
    

      And now, enjoying his ideas and the sound of his own voice, and looking
      with pleasure at the plump but well-proportioned, neatly cropped, correct
      Meier, Rashevitch dreamed of how he would arrange his daughter's marriage
      with a good man, and then how all his worries over the estate would pass
      to his son-in-law. Hateful worries! The interest owing to the bank had not
      been paid for the last two quarters, and fines and arrears of all sorts
      had mounted up to more than two thousand.
    

      "To my mind there can be no doubt," Rashevitch went on, growing more and
      more enthusiastic, "that if a Richard Coeur-de-Lion, or Frederick
      Barbarossa, for instance, is brave and noble those qualities will pass by
      heredity to his son, together with the convolutions and bumps of the
      brain, and if that courage and nobility of soul are preserved in the son
      by means of education and exercise, and if he marries a princess who is
      also noble and brave, those qualities will be transmitted to his grandson,
      and so on, until they become a generic characteristic and pass organically
      into the flesh and blood. Thanks to a strict sexual selection, to the fact
      that high-born families have instinctively guarded themselves against
      marriage with their inferiors, and young men of high rank have not married
      just anybody, lofty, spiritual qualities have been transmitted from
      generation to generation in their full purity, have been preserved, and as
      time goes on have, through exercise, become more exalted and lofty. For
      the fact that there is good in humanity we are indebted to nature, to the
      normal, natural, consistent order of things, which has throughout the ages
      scrupulously segregated blue blood from plebeian. Yes, my dear boy, no low
      lout, no cook's son has given us literature, science, art, law,
      conceptions of honour and duty . . . . For all these things mankind is
      indebted exclusively to the aristocracy, and from that point of view, the
      point of view of natural history, an inferior Sobakevitch by the very fact
      of his blue blood is superior and more useful than the very best merchant,
      even though the latter may have built fifteen museums. Say what you like!
      And when I refuse to shake hands with a low lout or a cook's son, or to
      let him sit down to table with me, by that very act I am safeguarding what
      is the best thing on earth, and am carrying out one of Mother Nature's
      finest designs for leading us up to perfection. . ."
    

      Rashevitch stood still, combing his beard with both hands; his shadow,
      too, stood still on the wall, looking like a pair of scissors.
    

      "Take Mother-Russia now," he went on, thrusting his hands in his pockets
      and standing first on his heels and then on his toes. "Who are her best
      people? Take our first-rate painters, writers, composers . . . . Who are
      they? They were all of aristocratic origin. Pushkin, Lermontov, Turgenev,
      Gontcharov, Tolstoy, they were not sexton's children."
    

      "Gontcharov was a merchant," said Meier.
    

      "Well, the exception only proves the rule. Besides, Gontcharov's genius is
      quite open to dispute. But let us drop names and turn to facts. What would
      you say, my good sir, for instance, to this eloquent fact: when one of the
      mob forces his way where he has not been permitted before, into society,
      into the world of learning, of literature, into the Zemstvo or the law
      courts, observe, Nature herself, first of all, champions the higher rights
      of humanity, and is the first to wage war on the rabble. As soon as the
      plebeian forces himself into a place he is not fit for he begins to ail,
      to go into consumption, to go out of his mind, and to degenerate, and
      nowhere do we find so many puny, neurotic wrecks, consumptives, and
      starvelings of all sorts as among these darlings. They die like flies in
      autumn. If it were not for this providential degeneration there would not
      have been a stone left standing of our civilization, the rabble would have
      demolished everything. Tell me, if you please, what has the inroad of the
      barbarians given us so far? What has the rabble brought with it?"
      Rashevitch assumed a mysterious, frightened expression, and went on:
      "Never has literature and learning been at such low ebb among us as now.
      The men of to-day, my good sir, have neither ideas nor ideals, and all
      their sayings and doings are permeated by one spirit-to get all they can
      and to strip someone to his last thread. All these men of to-day who give
      themselves out as honest and progressive people can be bought at a rouble
      a piece, and the distinguishing mark of the 'intellectual' of to-day is
      that you have to keep strict watch over your pocket when you talk to him,
      or else he will run off with your purse." Rashevitch winked and burst out
      laughing. "Upon my soul, he will!" he said, in a thin, gleeful voice. "And
      morals! What of their morals?" Rashevitch looked round towards the door.
      "No one is surprised nowadays when a wife robs and leaves her husband.
      What's that, a trifle! Nowadays, my dear boy, a chit of a girl of twelve
      is scheming to get a lover, and all these amateur theatricals and literary
      evenings are only invented to make it easier to get a rich merchant to
      take a girl on as his mistress. . . . Mothers sell their daughters, and
      people make no bones about asking a husband at what price he sells his
      wife, and one can haggle over the bargain, you know, my dear. . . ."
    

      Meier, who had been sitting motionless and silent all the time, suddenly
      got up from the sofa and looked at his watch.
    

      "I beg your pardon, Pavel Ilyitch," he said, "it is time for me to be
      going."
    

      But Pavel Ilyitch, who had not finished his remarks, put his arm round him
      and, forcibly reseating him on the sofa, vowed that he would not let him
      go without supper. And again Meier sat and listened, but he looked at
      Rashevitch with perplexity and uneasiness, as though he were only now
      beginning to understand him. Patches of red came into his face. And when
      at last a maidservant came in to tell them that the young ladies asked
      them to go to supper, he gave a sigh of relief and was the first to walk
      out of the study.
    

      At the table in the next room were Rashevitch's daughters, Genya and
      Iraida, girls of four-and-twenty and two-and-twenty respectively, both
      very pale, with black eyes, and exactly the same height. Genya had her
      hair down, and Iraida had hers done up high on her head. Before eating
      anything they each drank a wineglassful of bitter liqueur, with an air as
      though they had drunk it by accident for the first time in their lives and
      both were overcome with confusion and burst out laughing.
    

      "Don't be naughty, girls," said Rashevitch.
    

      Genya and Iraida talked French with each other, and Russian with their
      father and their visitor. Interrupting one another, and mixing up French
      words with Russian, they began rapidly describing how just at this time in
      August, in previous years, they had set off to the boarding school and
      what fun it had been. Now there was nowhere to go, and they had to stay at
      their home in the country, summer and winter without change. Such
      dreariness!
    

      "Don't be naughty, girls," Rashevitch said again.
    

      He wanted to be talking himself. If other people talked in his presence,
      he suffered from a feeling like jealousy.
    

      "So that's how it is, my dear boy," he began, looking affectionately at
      Meier. "In the simplicity and goodness of our hearts, and from fear of
      being suspected of being behind the times, we fraternize with, excuse me,
      all sorts of riff-raff, we preach fraternity and equality with
      money-lenders and innkeepers; but if we would only think, we should see
      how criminal that good-nature is. We have brought things to such a pass,
      that the fate of civilization is hanging on a hair. My dear fellow, what
      our forefathers gained in the course of ages will be to-morrow, if not
      to-day, outraged and destroyed by these modern Huns. . . ."
    

      After supper they all went into the drawing-room. Genya and Iraida lighted
      the candles on the piano, got out their music. . . . But their father
      still went on talking, and there was no telling when he would leave off.
      They looked with misery and vexation at their egoist-father, to whom the
      pleasure of chattering and displaying his intelligence was evidently more
      precious and important than his daughters' happiness. Meier, the only
      young man who ever came to their house, came-they knew-for the sake of
      their charming, feminine society, but the irrepressible old man had taken
      possession of him, and would not let him move a step away.
    

      "Just as the knights of the west repelled the invasions of the Mongols, so
      we, before it is too late, ought to unite and strike together against our
      foe," Rashevitch went on in the tone of a preacher, holding up his right
      hand. "May I appear to the riff-raff not as Pavel Ilyitch, but as a
      mighty, menacing Richard Coeur-de-Lion. Let us give up sloppy
      sentimentality; enough of it! Let us all make a compact, that as soon as a
      plebeian comes near us we fling some careless phrase straight in his ugly
      face: 'Paws off! Go back to your kennel, you cur!' straight in his ugly
      face," Rashevitch went on gleefully, flicking his crooked finger in front
      of him. "In his ugly face!"
    

      "I can't do that," Meier brought out, turning away.
    

      "Why not?" Rashevitch answered briskly, anticipating a prolonged and
      interesting argument. "Why not?"
    

      "Because I am of the artisan class myself!"
    

      As he said this Meier turned crimson, and his neck seemed to swell, and
      tears actually gleamed in his eyes.
    

      "My father was a simple workman," he said, in a rough, jerky voice, "but I
      see no harm in that."
    

      Rashevitch was fearfully confused. Dumbfoundered, as though he had been
      caught in the act of a crime, he gazed helplessly at Meier, and did not
      know what to say. Genya and Iraida flushed crimson, and bent over their
      music; they were ashamed of their tactless father. A minute passed in
      silence, and there was a feeling of unbearable discomfort, when all at
      once with a sort of painful stiffness and inappropriateness, there sounded
      in the air the words:
    

      "Yes, I am of the artisan class, and I am proud of it!"
    

      Thereupon Meier, stumbling awkwardly among the furniture, took his leave,
      and walked rapidly into the hall, though his carriage was not yet at the
      door.
    

      "You'll have a dark drive to-night," Rashevitch muttered, following him.
      "The moon does not rise till late to-night."
    

      They stood together on the steps in the dark, and waited for the horses to
      be brought. It was cool.
    

      "There's a falling star," said Meier, wrapping himself in his overcoat.
    

      "There are a great many in August."
    

      When the horses were at the door, Rashevitch gazed intently at the sky,
      and said with a sigh:
    

      "A phenomenon worthy of the pen of Flammarion. . . ."
    

      After seeing his visitor off, he walked up and down the garden,
      gesticulating in the darkness, reluctant to believe that such a queer,
      stupid misunderstanding had only just occurred. He was ashamed and vexed
      with himself. In the first place it had been extremely incautious and
      tactless on his part to raise the damnable subject of blue blood, without
      finding out beforehand what his visitor's position was. Something of the
      same sort had happened to him before; he had, on one occasion in a railway
      carriage, begun abusing the Germans, and it had afterwards appeared that
      all the persons he had been conversing with were German. In the second
      place he felt that Meier would never come and see him again. These
      intellectuals who have risen from the people are morbidly sensitive,
      obstinate and slow to forgive.
    

      "It's bad, it's bad," muttered Rashevitch, spitting; he had a feeling of
      discomfort and loathing as though he had eaten soap. "Ah, it's bad!"
    

      He could see from the garden, through the drawing-room window, Genya by
      the piano, very pale, and looking scared, with her hair down. She was
      talking very, very rapidly. . . . Iraida was walking up and down the room,
      lost in thought; but now she, too, began talking rapidly with her face
      full of indignation. They were both talking at once. Rashevitch could not
      hear a word, but he guessed what they were talking about. Genya was
      probably complaining that her father drove away every decent person from
      the house with his talk, and to-day he had driven away from them their one
      acquaintance, perhaps a suitor, and now the poor young man would not have
      one place in the whole district where he could find rest for his soul. And
      judging by the despairing way in which she threw up her arms, Iraida was
      talking probably on the subject of their dreary existence, their wasted
      youth. . . .
    

      When he reached his own room, Rashevitch sat down on his bed and began to
      undress. He felt oppressed, and he was still haunted by the same feeling
      as though he had eaten soap. He was ashamed. As he undressed he looked at
      his long, sinewy, elderly legs, and remembered that in the district they
      called him the "toad," and after every long conversation he always felt
      ashamed. Somehow or other, by some fatality, it always happened that he
      began mildly, amicably, with good intentions, calling himself an old
      student, an idealist, a Quixote, but without being himself aware of it,
      gradually passed into abuse and slander, and what was most surprising,
      with perfect sincerity criticized science, art and morals, though he had
      not read a book for the last twenty years, had been nowhere farther than
      their provincial town, and did not really know what was going on in the
      world. If he sat down to write anything, if it were only a letter of
      congratulation, there would somehow be abuse in the letter. And all this
      was strange, because in reality he was a man of feeling, given to tears.
      Could he be possessed by some devil which hated and slandered in him,
      apart from his own will?
    

      "It's bad," he sighed, as he lay down under the quilt. "It's bad."
    

      His daughters did not sleep either. There was a sound of laughter and
      screaming, as though someone was being pursued; it was Genya in hysterics.
      A little later Iraida was sobbing too. A maidservant ran barefoot up and
      down the passage several times. . . .
    

      "What a business! Good Lord! . . ." muttered Rashevitch, sighing and
      tossing from side to side. "It's bad."
    

      He had a nightmare. He dreamt he was standing naked, as tall as a giraffe,
      in the middle of the room, and saying, as he flicked his finger before
      him:
    

      "In his ugly face! his ugly face! his ugly face!"
    

      He woke up in a fright, and first of all remembered that a
      misunderstanding had happened in the evening, and that Meier would
      certainly not come again. He remembered, too, that he had to pay the
      interest at the bank, to find husbands for his daughters, that one must
      have food and drink, and close at hand were illness, old age,
      unpleasantnesses, that soon it would be winter, and that there was no
      wood. . . .
    

      It was past nine o'clock in the morning. Rashevitch slowly dressed, drank
      his tea and ate two hunks of bread and butter. His daughters did not come
      down to breakfast; they did not want to meet him, and that wounded him. He
      lay down on his sofa in his study, then sat down to his table and began
      writing a letter to his daughters. His hand shook and his eyes smarted. He
      wrote that he was old, and no use to anyone and that nobody loved him, and
      he begged his daughters to forget him, and when he died to bury him in a
      plain, deal coffin without ceremony, or to send his body to Harkov to the
      dissecting theatre. He felt that every line he wrote reeked of malice and
      affectation, but he could not stop, and went on writing and writing.
    

      "The toad!" he suddenly heard from the next room; it was the voice of his
      elder daughter, a voice with a hiss of indignation. "The toad!"
    

      "The toad!" the younger one repeated like an echo. "The toad!"
    

      A FATHER
    

      "I ADMIT I have had a drop. . . . You must excuse me. I went into a beer
      shop on the way here, and as it was so hot had a couple of bottles. It's
      hot, my boy."
    

      Old Musatov took a nondescript rag out of his pocket and wiped his shaven,
      battered face with it.
    

      "I have come only for a minute, Borenka, my angel," he went on, not
      looking at his son, "about something very important. Excuse me, perhaps I
      am hindering you. Haven't you ten roubles, my dear, you could let me have
      till Tuesday? You see, I ought to have paid for my lodging yesterday, and
      money, you see! . . . None! Not to save my life!"
    

      Young Musatov went out without a word, and began whispering the other side
      of the door with the landlady of the summer villa and his colleagues who
      had taken the villa with him. Three minutes later he came back, and
      without a word gave his father a ten-rouble note. The latter thrust it
      carelessly into his pocket without looking at it, and said:
    

      "Merci. Well, how are you getting on? It's a long time since we
      met."
    

      "Yes, a long time, not since Easter."
    

      "Half a dozen times I have been meaning to come to you, but I've never had
      time. First one thing, then another. . . . It's simply awful! I am talking
      nonsense though. . . . All that's nonsense. Don't you believe me, Borenka.
      I said I would pay you back the ten roubles on Tuesday, don't believe that
      either. Don't believe a word I say. I have nothing to do at all, it's
      simply laziness, drunkenness, and I am ashamed to be seen in such clothes
      in the street. You must excuse me, Borenka. Here I have sent the girl to
      you three times for money and written you piteous letters. Thanks for the
      money, but don't believe the letters; I was telling fibs. I am ashamed to
      rob you, my angel; I know that you can scarcely make both ends meet
      yourself, and feed on locusts, but my impudence is too much for me. I am
      such a specimen of impudence-fit for a show! . . . You must excuse me,
      Borenka. I tell you the truth, because I can't see your angel face without
      emotion."
    

      A minute passed in silence. The old man heaved a deep sigh and said:
    

      "You might treat me to a glass of beer perhaps."
    

      His son went out without a word, and again there was a sound of whispering
      the other side of the door. When a little later the beer was brought in,
      the old man seemed to revive at the sight of the bottles and abruptly
      changed his tone.
    

      "I was at the races the other day, my boy," he began telling him, assuming
      a scared expression. "We were a party of three, and we pooled three
      roubles on Frisky. And, thanks to that Frisky, we got thirty-two roubles
      each for our rouble. I can't get on without the races, my boy. It's a
      gentlemanly diversion. My virago always gives me a dressing over the
      races, but I go. I love it, and that's all about it."
    

      Boris, a fair-haired young man with a melancholy immobile face, was
      walking slowly up and down, listening in silence. When the old man stopped
      to clear his throat, he went up to him and said:
    

      "I bought myself a pair of boots the other day, father, which turn out to
      be too tight for me. Won't you take them? I'll let you have them cheap."
    

      "If you like," said the old man with a grimace, "only for the price you
      gave for them, without any cheapening."
    

      "Very well, I'll let you have them on credit."
    

      The son groped under the bed and produced the new boots. The father took
      off his clumsy, rusty, evidently second-hand boots and began trying on the
      new ones.
    

      "A perfect fit," he said. "Right, let me keep them. And on Tuesday, when I
      get my pension, I'll send you the money for them. That's not true,
      though," he went on, suddenly falling into the same tearful tone again.
      "And it was a lie about the races, too, and a lie about the pension. And
      you are deceiving me, Borenka. . . . I feel your generous tactfulness. I
      see through you! Your boots were too small, because your heart is too big.
      Ah, Borenka, Borenka! I understand it all and feel it!"
    

      "Have you moved into new lodgings?" his son interrupted, to change the
      conversation.
    

      "Yes, my boy. I move every month. My virago can't stay long in the same
      place with her temper."
    

      "I went to your lodgings, I meant to ask you to stay here with me. In your
      state of health it would do you good to be in the fresh air."
    

      "No," said the old man, with a wave of his hand, "the woman wouldn't let
      me, and I shouldn't care to myself. A hundred times you have tried to drag
      me out of the pit, and I have tried myself, but nothing came of it. Give
      it up. I must stick in my filthy hole. This minute, here I am sitting,
      looking at your angel face, yet something is drawing me home to my hole.
      Such is my fate. You can't draw a dung-beetle to a rose. But it's time I
      was going, my boy. It's getting dark."
    

      "Wait a minute then, I'll come with you. I have to go to town to-day
      myself."
    

      Both put on their overcoats and went out. When a little while afterwards
      they were driving in a cab, it was already dark, and lights began to gleam
      in the windows.
    

      "I've robbed you, Borenka!" the father muttered. "Poor children, poor
      children! It must be a dreadful trouble to have such a father! Borenka, my
      angel, I cannot lie when I see your face. You must excuse me. . . . What
      my depravity has come to, my God. Here I have just been robbing you, and
      put you to shame with my drunken state; I am robbing your brothers, too,
      and put them to shame, and you should have seen me yesterday! I won't
      conceal it, Borenka. Some neighbours, a wretched crew, came to see my
      virago; I got drunk, too, with them, and I blackguarded you poor children
      for all I was worth. I abused you, and complained that you had abandoned
      me. I wanted, you see, to touch the drunken hussies' hearts, and pose as
      an unhappy father. It's my way, you know, when I want to screen my vices I
      throw all the blame on my innocent children. I can't tell lies and hide
      things from you, Borenka. I came to see you as proud as a peacock, but
      when I saw your gentleness and kind heart, my tongue clave to the roof of
      my mouth, and it upset my conscience completely."
    

      "Hush, father, let's talk of something else."
    

      "Mother of God, what children I have," the old man went on, not heeding
      his son. "What wealth God has bestowed on me. Such children ought not to
      have had a black sheep like me for a father, but a real man with soul and
      feeling! I am not worthy of you!"
    

      The old man took off his cap with a button at the top and crossed himself
      several times.
    

      "Thanks be to Thee, O Lord!" he said with a sigh, looking from side to
      side as though seeking for an ikon. "Remarkable, exceptional children! I
      have three sons, and they are all like one. Sober, steady, hard-working,
      and what brains! Cabman, what brains! Grigory alone has brains enough for
      ten. He speaks French, he speaks German, and talks better than any of your
      lawyers-one is never tired of listening. My children, my children, I can't
      believe that you are mine! I can't believe it! You are a martyr, my
      Borenka, I am ruining you, and I shall go on ruining you. . . . You give
      to me endlessly, though you know your money is thrown away. The other day
      I sent you a pitiful letter, I described how ill I was, but you know I was
      lying, I wanted the money for rum. And you give to me because you are
      afraid to wound me by refusing. I know all that, and feel it. Grisha's a
      martyr, too. On Thursday I went to his office, drunk, filthy, ragged,
      reeking of vodka like a cellar . . . I went straight up, such a figure, I
      pestered him with nasty talk, while his colleagues and superiors and
      petitioners were standing round. I have disgraced him for life. And he
      wasn't the least confused, only turned a bit pale, but smiled and came up
      to me as though there were nothing the matter, even introduced me to his
      colleagues. Then he took me all the way home, and not a word of reproach.
      I rob him worse than you. Take your brother Sasha now, he's a martyr too!
      He married, as you know, a colonel's daughter of an aristocratic circle,
      and got a dowry with her. . . . You would think he would have nothing to
      do with me. No, brother, after his wedding he came with his young wife and
      paid me the first visit . . . in my hole. . . . Upon my soul!"
    

      The old man gave a sob and then began laughing.
    

      "And at that moment, as luck would have it, we were eating grated radish
      with kvass and frying fish, and there was a stink enough in the flat to
      make the devil sick. I was lying down-I'd had a drop-my virago bounced out
      at the young people with her face crimson. . . . It was a disgrace in
      fact. But Sasha rose superior to it all."
    

      "Yes, our Sasha is a good fellow," said Boris.
    

      "The most splendid fellow! You are all pure gold, you and Grisha and Sasha
      and Sonya. I worry you, torment you, disgrace you, rob you, and all my
      life I have not heard one word of reproach from you, you have never given
      me one cross look. It would be all very well if I had been a decent father
      to you-but as it is! You have had nothing from me but harm. I am a bad,
      dissipated man. . . . Now, thank God, I am quieter and I have no strength
      of will, but in old days when you were little I had determination, will.
      Whatever I said or did I always thought it was right. Sometimes I'd come
      home from the club at night, drunk and ill-humoured, and scold at your
      poor mother for spending money. The whole night I would be railing at her,
      and think it the right thing too; you would get up in the morning and go
      to school, while I'd still be venting my temper upon her. Heavens! I did
      torture her, poor martyr! When you came back from school and I was asleep
      you didn't dare to have dinner till I got up. At dinner again there would
      be a flare up. I daresay you remember. I wish no one such a father; God
      sent me to you for a trial. Yes, for a trial! Hold out, children, to the
      end! Honour thy father and thy days shall be long. Perhaps for your noble
      conduct God will grant you long life. Cabman, stop!"
    

      The old man jumped out of the cab and ran into a tavern. Half an hour
      later he came back, cleared his throat in a drunken way, and sat down
      beside his son.
    

      "Where's Sonya now?" he asked. "Still at boarding-school?"
    

      "No, she left in May, and is living now with Sasha's mother-in-law."
    

      "There!" said the old man in surprise. "She is a jolly good girl! So she
      is following her brother's example. . . . Ah, Borenka, she has no mother,
      no one to rejoice over her! I say, Borenka, does she . . . does she know
      how I am living? Eh?"
    

      Boris made no answer. Five minutes passed in profound silence. The old man
      gave a sob, wiped his face with a rag and said:
    

      "I love her, Borenka! She is my only daughter, you know, and in one's old
      age there is no comfort like a daughter. Could I see her, Borenka?"
    

      "Of course, when you like."
    

      "Really? And she won't mind?"
    

      "Of course not, she has been trying to find you so as to see you."
    

      "Upon my soul! What children! Cabman, eh? Arrange it, Borenka darling! She
      is a young lady now, delicatesse, consommÃ©, and all the rest of it
      in a refined way, and I don't want to show myself to her in such an abject
      state. I'll tell you how we'll contrive to work it. For three days I will
      keep away from spirits, to get my filthy, drunken phiz into better order.
      Then I'll come to you, and you shall lend me for the time some suit of
      yours; I'll shave and have my hair cut, then you go and bring her to your
      flat. Will you?"
    

      "Very well."
    

      "Cabman, stop!"
    

      The old man sprang out of the cab again and ran into a tavern. While Boris
      was driving with him to his lodging he jumped out twice again, while his
      son sat silent and waited patiently for him. When, after dismissing the
      cab, they made their way across a long, filthy yard to the "virago's"
      lodging, the old man put on an utterly shamefaced and guilty air, and
      began timidly clearing his throat and clicking with his lips.
    

      "Borenka," he said in an ingratiating voice, "if my virago begins saying
      anything, don't take any notice . . . and behave to her, you know,
      affably. She is ignorant and impudent, but she's a good baggage. There is
      a good, warm heart beating in her bosom!"
    

      The long yard ended, and Boris found himself in a dark entry. The swing
      door creaked, there was a smell of cooking and a smoking samovar. There
      was a sound of harsh voices. Passing through the passage into the kitchen
      Boris could see nothing but thick smoke, a line with washing on it, and
      the chimney of the samovar through a crack of which golden sparks were
      dropping.
    

      "And here is my cell," said the old man, stooping down and going into a
      little room with a low-pitched ceiling, and an atmosphere unbearably
      stifling from the proximity of the kitchen.
    

      Here three women were sitting at the table regaling themselves. Seeing the
      visitors, they exchanged glances and left off eating.
    

      "Well, did you get it?" one of them, apparently the "virago" herself,
      asked abruptly.
    

      "Yes, yes," muttered the old man. "Well, Boris, pray sit down. Everything
      is plain here, young man . . . we live in a simple way."
    

      He bustled about in an aimless way. He felt ashamed before his son, and at
      the same time apparently he wanted to keep up before the women his dignity
      as cock of the walk, and as a forsaken, unhappy father.
    

      "Yes, young man, we live simply with no nonsense," he went on muttering.
      "We are simple people, young man. . . . We are not like you, we don't want
      to keep up a show before people. No! . . . Shall we have a drink of
      vodka?"
    

      One of the women (she was ashamed to drink before a stranger) heaved a
      sigh and said:
    

      "Well, I'll have another drink on account of the mushrooms. . . . They are
      such mushrooms, they make you drink even if you don't want to. Ivan
      Gerasimitch, offer the young gentleman, perhaps he will have a drink!"
    

      The last word she pronounced in a mincing drawl.
    

      "Have a drink, young man!" said the father, not looking at his son. "We
      have no wine or liqueurs, my boy, we live in a plain way."
    

      "He doesn't like our ways," sighed the "virago." "Never mind, never mind,
      he'll have a drink."
    

      Not to offend his father by refusing, Boris took a wineglass and drank in
      silence. When they brought in the samovar, to satisfy the old man, he
      drank two cups of disgusting tea in silence, with a melancholy face.
      Without a word he listened to the virago dropping hints about there being
      in this world cruel, heartless children who abandon their parents.
    

      "I know what you are thinking now!" said the old man, after drinking more
      and passing into his habitual state of drunken excitement. "You think I
      have let myself sink into the mire, that I am to be pitied, but to my
      thinking, this simple life is much more normal than your life, . . . I
      don't need anybody, and . . . and I don't intend to eat humble pie. . . .
      I can't endure a wretched boy's looking at me with compassion."
    

      After tea he cleaned a herring and sprinkled it with onion, with such
      feeling, that tears of emotion stood in his eyes. He began talking again
      about the races and his winnings, about some Panama hat for which he had
      paid sixteen roubles the day before. He told lies with the same relish
      with which he ate herring and drank. His son sat on in silence for an
      hour, and began to say good-bye.
    

      "I don't venture to keep you," the old man said, haughtily. "You must
      excuse me, young man, for not living as you would like!"
    

      He ruffled up his feathers, snorted with dignity, and winked at the women.
    

      "Good-bye, young man," he said, seeing his son into the entry. "Attendez."
    

      In the entry, where it was dark, he suddenly pressed his face against the
      young man's sleeve and gave a sob.
    

      "I should like to have a look at Sonitchka," he whispered. "Arrange it,
      Borenka, my angel. I'll shave, I'll put on your suit . . . I'll put on a
      straight face . . . I'll hold my tongue while she is there. Yes, yes, I
      will hold my tongue!"
    

      He looked round timidly towards the door, through which the women's voices
      were heard, checked his sobs, and said aloud:
    

      "Good-bye, young man! Attendez."
    

      ON THE ROAD
    

"Upon the breast of a gigantic crag, A golden cloudlet rested for one
      night."


      LERMONTOV.
    

      IN the room which the tavern keeper, the Cossack Semyon Tchistopluy,
      called the "travellers' room," that is kept exclusively for travellers, a
      tall, broad-shouldered man of forty was sitting at the big unpainted
      table. He was asleep with his elbows on the table and his head leaning on
      his fist. An end of tallow candle, stuck into an old pomatum pot, lighted
      up his light brown beard, his thick, broad nose, his sunburnt cheeks, and
      the thick, black eyebrows overhanging his closed eyes. . . . The nose and
      the cheeks and the eyebrows, all the features, each taken separately, were
      coarse and heavy, like the furniture and the stove in the "travellers'
      room," but taken all together they gave the effect of something harmonious
      and even beautiful. Such is the lucky star, as it is called, of the
      Russian face: the coarser and harsher its features the softer and more
      good-natured it looks. The man was dressed in a gentleman's reefer jacket,
      shabby, but bound with wide new braid, a plush waistcoat, and full black
      trousers thrust into big high boots.
    

      On one of the benches, which stood in a continuous row along the wall, a
      girl of eight, in a brown dress and long black stockings, lay asleep on a
      coat lined with fox. Her face was pale, her hair was flaxen, her shoulders
      were narrow, her whole body was thin and frail, but her nose stood out as
      thick and ugly a lump as the man's. She was sound asleep, and unconscious
      that her semi-circular comb had fallen off her head and was cutting her
      cheek.
    

      The "travellers' room" had a festive appearance. The air was full of the
      smell of freshly scrubbed floors, there were no rags hanging as usual on
      the line that ran diagonally across the room, and a little lamp was
      burning in the corner over the table, casting a patch of red light on the
      ikon of St. George the Victorious. From the ikon stretched on each side of
      the corner a row of cheap oleographs, which maintained a strict and
      careful gradation in the transition from the sacred to the profane. In the
      dim light of the candle end and the red ikon lamp the pictures looked like
      one continuous stripe, covered with blurs of black. When the tiled stove,
      trying to sing in unison with the weather, drew in the air with a howl,
      while the logs, as though waking up, burst into bright flame and hissed
      angrily, red patches began dancing on the log walls, and over the head of
      the sleeping man could be seen first the Elder Seraphim, then the Shah
      Nasir-ed-Din, then a fat, brown baby with goggle eyes, whispering in the
      ear of a young girl with an extraordinarily blank, and indifferent face. .
      . .
    

      Outside a storm was raging. Something frantic and wrathful, but profoundly
      unhappy, seemed to be flinging itself about the tavern with the ferocity
      of a wild beast and trying to break in. Banging at the doors, knocking at
      the windows and on the roof, scratching at the walls, it alternately
      threatened and besought, then subsided for a brief interval, and then with
      a gleeful, treacherous howl burst into the chimney, but the wood flared
      up, and the fire, like a chained dog, flew wrathfully to meet its foe, a
      battle began, and after it-sobs, shrieks, howls of wrath. In all of this
      there was the sound of angry misery and unsatisfied hate, and the
      mortified impatience of something accustomed to triumph.
    

      Bewitched by this wild, inhuman music the "travellers' room" seemed
      spellbound for ever, but all at once the door creaked and the potboy, in a
      new print shirt, came in. Limping on one leg, and blinking his sleepy
      eyes, he snuffed the candle with his fingers, put some more wood on the
      fire and went out. At once from the church, which was three hundred paces
      from the tavern, the clock struck midnight. The wind played with the
      chimes as with the snowflakes; chasing the sounds of the clock it whirled
      them round and round over a vast space, so that some strokes were cut
      short or drawn out in long, vibrating notes, while others were completely
      lost in the general uproar. One stroke sounded as distinctly in the room
      as though it had chimed just under the window. The child, sleeping on the
      fox-skin, started and raised her head. For a minute she stared blankly at
      the dark window, at Nasir-ed-Din over whom a crimson glow from the fire
      flickered at that moment, then she turned her eyes upon the sleeping man.
    

      "Daddy," she said.
    

      But the man did not move. The little girl knitted her brow angrily, lay
      down, and curled up her legs. Someone in the tavern gave a loud, prolonged
      yawn. Soon afterwards there was the squeak of the swing door and the sound
      of indistinct voices. Someone came in, shaking the snow off, and stamping
      in felt boots which made a muffled thud.
    

      "What is it?" a woman's voice asked languidly.
    

      "Mademoiselle Ilovaisky has come, . . ." answered a bass voice.
    

      Again there was the squeak of the swing door. Then came the roar of the
      wind rushing in. Someone, probably the lame boy, ran to the door leading
      to the "travellers' room," coughed deferentially, and lifted the latch.
    

      "This way, lady, please," said a woman's voice in dulcet tones. "It's
      clean in here, my beauty. . . ."
    

      The door was opened wide and a peasant with a beard appeared in the
      doorway, in the long coat of a coachman, plastered all over with snow from
      head to foot, and carrying a big trunk on his shoulder. He was followed
      into the room by a feminine figure, scarcely half his height, with no face
      and no arms, muffled and wrapped up like a bundle and also covered with
      snow. A damp chill, as from a cellar, seemed to come to the child from the
      coachman and the bundle, and the fire and the candles flickered.
    

      "What nonsense!" said the bundle angrily, "We could go perfectly well. We
      have only nine more miles to go, mostly by the forest, and we should not
      get lost. . . ."
    

      "As for getting lost, we shouldn't, but the horses can't go on, lady!"
      answered the coachman. "And it is Thy Will, O Lord! As though I had done
      it on purpose!"
    

      "God knows where you have brought me. . . . Well, be quiet. . . . There
      are people asleep here, it seems. You can go. . . ."
    

      The coachman put the portmanteau on the floor, and as he did so, a great
      lump of snow fell off his shoulders. He gave a sniff and went out.
    

      Then the little girl saw two little hands come out from the middle of the
      bundle, stretch upwards and begin angrily disentangling the network of
      shawls, kerchiefs, and scarves. First a big shawl fell on the ground, then
      a hood, then a white knitted kerchief. After freeing her head, the
      traveller took off her pelisse and at once shrank to half the size. Now
      she was in a long, grey coat with big buttons and bulging pockets. From
      one pocket she pulled out a paper parcel, from the other a bunch of big,
      heavy keys, which she put down so carelessly that the sleeping man started
      and opened his eyes. For some time he looked blankly round him as though
      he didn't know where he was, then he shook his head, went to the corner
      and sat down. . . . The newcomer took off her great coat, which made her
      shrink to half her size again, she took off her big felt boots, and sat
      down, too.
    

      By now she no longer resembled a bundle: she was a thin little brunette of
      twenty, as slim as a snake, with a long white face and curly hair. Her
      nose was long and sharp, her chin, too, was long and sharp, her eyelashes
      were long, the corners of her mouth were sharp, and, thanks to this
      general sharpness, the expression of her face was biting. Swathed in a
      closely fitting black dress with a mass of lace at her neck and sleeves,
      with sharp elbows and long pink fingers, she recalled the portraits of
      mediÃ¦val English ladies. The grave concentration of her face increased
      this likeness.
    

      The lady looked round at the room, glanced sideways at the man and the
      little girl, shrugged her shoulders, and moved to the window. The dark
      windows were shaking from the damp west wind. Big flakes of snow
      glistening in their whiteness, lay on the window frame, but at once
      disappeared, borne away by the wind. The savage music grew louder and
      louder. . . .
    

      After a long silence the little girl suddenly turned over, and said
      angrily, emphasizing each word:
    

      "Oh, goodness, goodness, how unhappy I am! Unhappier than anyone!"
    

      The man got up and moved with little steps to the child with a guilty air,
      which was utterly out of keeping with his huge figure and big beard.
    

      "You are not asleep, dearie?" he said, in an apologetic voice. "What do
      you want?"
    

      "I don't want anything, my shoulder aches! You are a wicked man, Daddy,
      and God will punish you! You'll see He will punish you."
    

      "My darling, I know your shoulder aches, but what can I do, dearie?" said
      the man, in the tone in which men who have been drinking excuse themselves
      to their stern spouses. "It's the journey has made your shoulder ache,
      Sasha. To-morrow we shall get there and rest, and the pain will go away. .
      . ."
    

      "To-morrow, to-morrow. . . . Every day you say to-morrow. We shall be
      going on another twenty days."
    

      "But we shall arrive to-morrow, dearie, on your father's word of honour. I
      never tell a lie, but if we are detained by the snowstorm it is not my
      fault."
    

      "I can't bear any more, I can't, I can't!"
    

      Sasha jerked her leg abruptly and filled the room with an unpleasant
      wailing. Her father made a despairing gesture, and looked hopelessly
      towards the young lady. The latter shrugged her shoulders, and
      hesitatingly went up to Sasha.
    

      "Listen, my dear," she said, "it is no use crying. It's really naughty; if
      your shoulder aches it can't be helped."
    

      "You see, Madam," said the man quickly, as though defending himself, "we
      have not slept for two nights, and have been travelling in a revolting
      conveyance. Well, of course, it is natural she should be ill and
      miserable, . . . and then, you know, we had a drunken driver, our
      portmanteau has been stolen . . . the snowstorm all the time, but what's
      the use of crying, Madam? I am exhausted, though, by sleeping in a sitting
      position, and I feel as though I were drunk. Oh, dear! Sasha, and I feel
      sick as it is, and then you cry!"
    

      The man shook his head, and with a gesture of despair sat down.
    

      "Of course you mustn't cry," said the young lady. "It's only little babies
      cry. If you are ill, dear, you must undress and go to sleep. . . . Let us
      take off your things!"
    

      When the child had been undressed and pacified a silence reigned again.
      The young lady seated herself at the window, and looked round wonderingly
      at the room of the inn, at the ikon, at the stove. . . . Apparently the
      room and the little girl with the thick nose, in her short boy's
      nightgown, and the child's father, all seemed strange to her. This strange
      man was sitting in a corner; he kept looking about him helplessly, as
      though he were drunk, and rubbing his face with the palm of his hand. He
      sat silent, blinking, and judging from his guilty-looking figure it was
      difficult to imagine that he would soon begin to speak. Yet he was the
      first to begin. Stroking his knees, he gave a cough, laughed, and said:
    

      "It's a comedy, it really is. . . . I look and I cannot believe my eyes:
      for what devilry has destiny driven us to this accursed inn? What did she
      want to show by it? Life sometimes performs such 'salto mortale,'
      one can only stare and blink in amazement. Have you come from far, Madam?"
    

      "No, not from far," answered the young lady. "I am going from our estate,
      fifteen miles from here, to our farm, to my father and brother. My name is
      Ilovaisky, and the farm is called Ilovaiskoe. It's nine miles away. What
      unpleasant weather!"
    

      "It couldn't be worse."
    

      The lame boy came in and stuck a new candle in the pomatum pot.
    

      "You might bring us the samovar, boy," said the man, addressing him.
    

      "Who drinks tea now?" laughed the boy. "It is a sin to drink tea before
      mass. . . ."
    

      "Never mind boy, you won't burn in hell if we do. . . ."
    

      Over the tea the new acquaintances got into conversation.
    

      Mlle. Ilovaisky learned that her companion was called Grigory Petrovitch
      Liharev, that he was the brother of the Liharev who was Marshal of
      Nobility in one of the neighbouring districts, and he himself had once
      been a landowner, but had "run through everything in his time." Liharev
      learned that her name was Marya Mihailovna, that her father had a huge
      estate, but that she was the only one to look after it as her father and
      brother looked at life through their fingers, were irresponsible, and were
      too fond of harriers.
    

      "My father and brother are all alone at the farm," she told him,
      brandishing her fingers (she had the habit of moving her fingers before
      her pointed face as she talked, and after every sentence moistened her
      lips with her sharp little tongue). "They, I mean men, are an
      irresponsible lot, and don't stir a finger for themselves. I can fancy
      there will be no one to give them a meal after the fast! We have no
      mother, and we have such servants that they can't lay the tablecloth
      properly when I am away. You can imagine their condition now! They will be
      left with nothing to break their fast, while I have to stay here all
      night. How strange it all is."
    

      She shrugged her shoulders, took a sip from her cup, and said:
    

      "There are festivals that have a special fragrance: at Easter, Trinity and
      Christmas there is a peculiar scent in the air. Even unbelievers are fond
      of those festivals. My brother, for instance, argues that there is no God,
      but he is the first to hurry to Matins at Easter."
    

      Liharev raised his eyes to Mlle. Ilovaisky and laughed.
    

      "They argue that there is no God," she went on, laughing too, "but why is
      it, tell me, all the celebrated writers, the learned men, clever people
      generally, in fact, believe towards the end of their life?"
    

      "If a man does not know how to believe when he is young, Madam, he won't
      believe in his old age if he is ever so much of a writer."
    

      Judging from Liharev's cough he had a bass voice, but, probably from being
      afraid to speak aloud, or from exaggerated shyness, he spoke in a tenor.
      After a brief pause he heaved a sign and said:
    

      "The way I look at it is that faith is a faculty of the spirit. It is just
      the same as a talent, one must be born with it. So far as I can judge by
      myself, by the people I have seen in my time, and by all that is done
      around us, this faculty is present in Russians in its highest degree.
      Russian life presents us with an uninterrupted succession of convictions
      and aspirations, and if you care to know, it has not yet the faintest
      notion of lack of faith or scepticism. If a Russian does not believe in
      God, it means he believes in something else."
    

      Liharev took a cup of tea from Mlle. Ilovaisky, drank off half in one
      gulp, and went on:
    

      "I will tell you about myself. Nature has implanted in my breast an
      extraordinary faculty for belief. Whisper it not to the night, but half my
      life I was in the ranks of the Atheists and Nihilists, but there was not
      one hour in my life in which I ceased to believe. All talents, as a rule,
      show themselves in early childhood, and so my faculty showed itself when I
      could still walk upright under the table. My mother liked her children to
      eat a great deal, and when she gave me food she used to say: 'Eat! Soup is
      the great thing in life!' I believed, and ate the soup ten times a day,
      ate like a shark, ate till I was disgusted and stupefied. My nurse used to
      tell me fairy tales, and I believed in house-spirits, in wood-elves, and
      in goblins of all kinds. I used sometimes to steal corrosive sublimate
      from my father, sprinkle it on cakes, and carry them up to the attic that
      the house-spirits, you see, might eat them and be killed. And when I was
      taught to read and understand what I read, then there was a fine to-do. I
      ran away to America and went off to join the brigands, and wanted to go
      into a monastery, and hired boys to torture me for being a Christian. And
      note that my faith was always active, never dead. If I was running away to
      America I was not alone, but seduced someone else, as great a fool as I
      was, to go with me, and was delighted when I was nearly frozen outside the
      town gates and when I was thrashed; if I went to join the brigands I
      always came back with my face battered. A most restless childhood, I
      assure you! And when they sent me to the high school and pelted me with
      all sorts of truths-that is, that the earth goes round the sun, or that
      white light is not white, but is made up of seven colours-my poor little
      head began to go round! Everything was thrown into a whirl in me: Navin
      who made the sun stand still, and my mother who in the name of the Prophet
      Elijah disapproved of lightning conductors, and my father who was
      indifferent to the truths I had learned. My enlightenment inspired me. I
      wandered about the house and stables like one possessed, preaching my
      truths, was horrified by ignorance, glowed with hatred for anyone who saw
      in white light nothing but white light. . . . But all that's nonsense and
      childishness. Serious, so to speak, manly enthusiasms began only at the
      university. You have, no doubt, Madam, taken your degree somewhere?"
    

      "I studied at Novotcherkask at the Don Institute."
    

      "Then you have not been to a university? So you don't know what science
      means. All the sciences in the world have the same passport, without which
      they regard themselves as meaningless . . . the striving towards truth!
      Every one of them, even pharmacology, has for its aim not utility, not the
      alleviation of life, but truth. It's remarkable! When you set to work to
      study any science, what strikes you first of all is its beginning. I
      assure you there is nothing more attractive and grander, nothing is so
      staggering, nothing takes a man's breath away like the beginning of any
      science. From the first five or six lectures you are soaring on wings of
      the brightest hopes, you already seem to yourself to be welcoming truth
      with open arms. And I gave myself up to science, heart and soul,
      passionately, as to the woman one loves. I was its slave; I found it the
      sun of my existence, and asked for no other. I studied day and night
      without rest, ruined myself over books, wept when before my eyes men
      exploited science for their own personal ends. But my enthusiasm did not
      last long. The trouble is that every science has a beginning but not an
      end, like a recurring decimal. Zoology has discovered 35,000 kinds of
      insects, chemistry reckons 60 elements. If in time tens of noughts can be
      written after these figures, Zoology and chemistry will be just as far
      from their end as now, and all contemporary scientific work consists in
      increasing these numbers. I saw through this trick when I discovered the
      35,001-st and felt no satisfaction. Well, I had no time to suffer from
      disillusionment, as I was soon possessed by a new faith. I plunged into
      Nihilism, with its manifestoes, its 'black divisions,' and all the rest of
      it. I 'went to the people,' worked in factories, worked as an oiler, as a
      barge hauler. Afterwards, when wandering over Russia, I had a taste of
      Russian life, I turned into a fervent devotee of that life. I loved the
      Russian people with poignant intensity; I loved their God and believed in
      Him, and in their language, their creative genius. . . . And so on, and so
      on. . . . I have been a Slavophile in my time, I used to pester Aksakov
      with letters, and I was a Ukrainophile, and an archÃ¦ologist, and a
      collector of specimens of peasant art. . . . I was enthusiastic over
      ideas, people, events, places . . . my enthusiasm was endless! Five years
      ago I was working for the abolition of private property; my last creed was
      non-resistance to evil."
    

      Sasha gave an abrupt sigh and began moving. Liharev got up and went to
      her.
    

      "Won't you have some tea, dearie?" he asked tenderly.
    

      "Drink it yourself," the child answered rudely. Liharev was disconcerted,
      and went back to the table with a guilty step.
    

      "Then you have had a lively time," said Mlle. Ilovaisky; "you have
      something to remember."
    

      "Well, yes, it's all very lively when one sits over tea and chatters to a
      kind listener, but you should ask what that liveliness has cost me! What
      price have I paid for the variety of my life? You see, Madam, I have not
      held my convictions like a German doctor of philosophy, zierlichmÃ¤nnerlich,
      I have not lived in solitude, but every conviction I have had has bound my
      back to the yoke, has torn my body to pieces. Judge, for yourself. I was
      wealthy like my brothers, but now I am a beggar. In the delirium of my
      enthusiasm I smashed up my own fortune and my wife's-a heap of other
      people's money. Now I am forty-two, old age is close upon me, and I am
      homeless, like a dog that has dropped behind its waggon at night. All my
      life I have not known what peace meant, my soul has been in continual
      agitation, distressed even by its hopes . . . I have been wearied out with
      heavy irregular work, have endured privation, have five times been in
      prison, have dragged myself across the provinces of Archangel and of
      Tobolsk . . . it's painful to think of it! I have lived, but in my fever I
      have not even been conscious of the process of life itself. Would you
      believe it, I don't remember a single spring, I never noticed how my wife
      loved me, how my children were born. What more can I tell you? I have been
      a misfortune to all who have loved me. . . . My mother has worn mourning
      for me all these fifteen years, while my proud brothers, who have had to
      wince, to blush, to bow their heads, to waste their money on my account,
      have come in the end to hate me like poison."
    

      Liharev got up and sat down again.
    

      "If I were simply unhappy I should thank God," he went on without looking
      at his listener. "My personal unhappiness sinks into the background when I
      remember how often in my enthusiasms I have been absurd, far from the
      truth, unjust, cruel, dangerous! How often I have hated and despised those
      whom I ought to have loved, and vice versa, I have changed a
      thousand times. One day I believe, fall down and worship, the next I flee
      like a coward from the gods and friends of yesterday, and swallow in
      silence the 'scoundrel!' they hurl after me. God alone has seen how often
      I have wept and bitten my pillow in shame for my enthusiasms. Never once
      in my life have I intentionally lied or done evil, but my conscience is
      not clear! I cannot even boast, Madam, that I have no one's life upon my
      conscience, for my wife died before my eyes, worn out by my reckless
      activity. Yes, my wife! I tell you they have two ways of treating women
      nowadays. Some measure women's skulls to prove woman is inferior to man,
      pick out her defects to mock at her, to look original in her eyes, and to
      justify their sensuality. Others do their utmost to raise women to their
      level, that is, force them to learn by heart the 35,000 species, to speak
      and write the same foolish things as they speak and write themselves."
    

      Liharev's face darkened.
    

      "I tell you that woman has been and always will be the slave of man," he
      said in a bass voice, striking his fist on the table. "She is the soft,
      tender wax which a man always moulds into anything he likes. . . . My God!
      for the sake of some trumpery masculine enthusiasm she will cut off her
      hair, abandon her family, die among strangers! . . . among the ideas for
      which she has sacrificed herself there is not a single feminine one. . . .
      An unquestioning, devoted slave! I have not measured skulls, but I say
      this from hard, bitter experience: the proudest, most independent women,
      if I have succeeded in communicating to them my enthusiasm, have followed
      me without criticism, without question, and done anything I chose; I have
      turned a nun into a Nihilist who, as I heard afterwards, shot a gendarme;
      my wife never left me for a minute in my wanderings, and like a
      weathercock changed her faith in step with my changing enthusiasms."
    

      Liharev jumped up and walked up and down the room.
    

      "A noble, sublime slavery!" he said, clasping his hands. "It is just in it
      that the highest meaning of woman's life lies! Of all the fearful medley
      of thoughts and impressions accumulated in my brain from my association
      with women my memory, like a filter, has retained no ideas, no clever
      saying, no philosophy, nothing but that extraordinary, resignation to
      fate, that wonderful mercifulness, forgiveness of everything."
    

      Liharev clenched his fists, stared at a fixed point, and with a sort of
      passionate intensity, as though he were savouring each word as he uttered
      it, hissed through his clenched teeth:
    

      "That . . . that great-hearted fortitude, faithfulness unto death, poetry
      of the heart. . . . The meaning of life lies in just that unrepining
      martyrdom, in the tears which would soften a stone, in the boundless,
      all-forgiving love which brings light and warmth into the chaos of life. .
      . ."
    

      Mlle. Ilovaisky got up slowly, took a step towards Liharev, and fixed her
      eyes upon his face. From the tears that glittered on his eyelashes, from
      his quivering, passionate voice, from the flush on his cheeks, it was
      clear to her that women were not a chance, not a simple subject of
      conversation. They were the object of his new enthusiasm, or, as he said
      himself, his new faith! For the first time in her life she saw a man
      carried away, fervently believing. With his gesticulations, with his
      flashing eyes he seemed to her mad, frantic, but there was a feeling of
      such beauty in the fire of his eyes, in his words, in all the movements of
      his huge body, that without noticing what she was doing she stood facing
      him as though rooted to the spot, and gazed into his face with delight.
    

      "Take my mother," he said, stretching out his hand to her with an
      imploring expression on his face, "I poisoned her existence, according to
      her ideas disgraced the name of Liharev, did her as much harm as the most
      malignant enemy, and what do you think? My brothers give her little sums
      for holy bread and church services, and outraging her religious feelings,
      she saves that money and sends it in secret to her erring Grigory. This
      trifle alone elevates and ennobles the soul far more than all the
      theories, all the clever sayings and the 35,000 species. I can give you
      thousands of instances. Take you, even, for instance! With tempest and
      darkness outside you are going to your father and your brother to cheer
      them with your affection in the holiday, though very likely they have
      forgotten and are not thinking of you. And, wait a bit, and you will love
      a man and follow him to the North Pole. You would, wouldn't you?"
    

      "Yes, if I loved him."
    

      "There, you see," cried Liharev delighted, and he even stamped with his
      foot. "Oh dear! How glad I am that I have met you! Fate is kind to me, I
      am always meeting splendid people. Not a day passes but one makes
      acquaintance with somebody one would give one's soul for. There are ever
      so many more good people than bad in this world. Here, see, for instance,
      how openly and from our hearts we have been talking as though we had known
      each other a hundred years. Sometimes, I assure you, one restrains oneself
      for ten years and holds one's tongue, is reserved with one's friends and
      one's wife, and meets some cadet in a train and babbles one's whole soul
      out to him. It is the first time I have the honour of seeing you, and yet
      I have confessed to you as I have never confessed in my life. Why is it?"
    

      Rubbing his hands and smiling good-humouredly Liharev walked up and down
      the room, and fell to talking about women again. Meanwhile they began
      ringing for matins.
    

      "Goodness," wailed Sasha. "He won't let me sleep with his talking!"
    

      "Oh, yes!" said Liharev, startled. "I am sorry, darling, sleep, sleep. . .
      . I have two boys besides her," he whispered. "They are living with their
      uncle, Madam, but this one can't exist a day without her father. She's
      wretched, she complains, but she sticks to me like a fly to honey. I have
      been chattering too much, Madam, and it would do you no harm to sleep.
      Wouldn't you like me to make up a bed for you?"
    

      Without waiting for permission he shook the wet pelisse, stretched it on a
      bench, fur side upwards, collected various shawls and scarves, put the
      overcoat folded up into a roll for a pillow, and all this he did in
      silence with a look of devout reverence, as though he were not handling a
      woman's rags, but the fragments of holy vessels. There was something
      apologetic, embarrassed about his whole figure, as though in the presence
      of a weak creature he felt ashamed of his height and strength. . . .
    

      When Mlle. Ilovaisky had lain down, he put out the candle and sat down on
      a stool by the stove.
    

      "So, Madam," he whispered, lighting a fat cigarette and puffing the smoke
      into the stove. "Nature has put into the Russian an extraordinary faculty
      for belief, a searching intelligence, and the gift of speculation, but all
      that is reduced to ashes by irresponsibility, laziness, and dreamy
      frivolity. . . . Yes. . . ."
    

      She gazed wonderingly into the darkness, and saw only a spot of red on the
      ikon and the flicker of the light of the stove on Liharev's face. The
      darkness, the chime of the bells, the roar of the storm, the lame boy,
      Sasha with her fretfulness, unhappy Liharev and his sayings-all this was
      mingled together, and seemed to grow into one huge impression, and God's
      world seemed to her fantastic, full of marvels and magical forces. All
      that she had heard was ringing in her ears, and human life presented
      itself to her as a beautiful poetic fairy-tale without an end.
    

      The immense impression grew and grew, clouded consciousness, and turned
      into a sweet dream. She was asleep, though she saw the little ikon lamp
      and a big nose with the light playing on it.
    

      She heard the sound of weeping.
    

      "Daddy, darling," a child's voice was tenderly entreating, "let's go back
      to uncle! There is a Christmas-tree there! Styopa and Kolya are there!"
    

      "My darling, what can I do?" a man's bass persuaded softly. "Understand
      me! Come, understand!"
    

      And the man's weeping blended with the child's. This voice of human
      sorrow, in the midst of the howling of the storm, touched the girl's ear
      with such sweet human music that she could not bear the delight of it, and
      wept too. She was conscious afterwards of a big, black shadow coming
      softly up to her, picking up a shawl that had dropped on to the floor and
      carefully wrapping it round her feet.
    

      Mlle. Ilovaisky was awakened by a strange uproar. She jumped up and looked
      about her in astonishment. The deep blue dawn was looking in at the window
      half-covered with snow. In the room there was a grey twilight, through
      which the stove and the sleeping child and Nasir-ed-Din stood out
      distinctly. The stove and the lamp were both out. Through the wide-open
      door she could see the big tavern room with a counter and chairs. A man,
      with a stupid, gipsy face and astonished eyes, was standing in the middle
      of the room in a puddle of melting snow, holding a big red star on a
      stick. He was surrounded by a group of boys, motionless as statues, and
      plastered over with snow. The light shone through the red paper of the
      star, throwing a glow of red on their wet faces. The crowd was shouting in
      disorder, and from its uproar Mlle. Ilovaisky could make out only one
      couplet:
    

      "Hi, you Little Russian lad, Bring your sharp knife, We will
      kill the Jew, we will kill him, The son of tribulation. . ."


      Liharev was standing near the counter, looking feelingly at the singers
      and tapping his feet in time. Seeing Mlle. Ilovaisky, he smiled all over
      his face and came up to her. She smiled too.
    

      "A happy Christmas!" he said. "I saw you slept well."
    

      She looked at him, said nothing, and went on smiling.
    

      After the conversation in the night he seemed to her not tall and broad
      shouldered, but little, just as the biggest steamer seems to us a little
      thing when we hear that it has crossed the ocean.
    

      "Well, it is time for me to set off," she said. "I must put on my things.
      Tell me where you are going now?"
    

      "I? To the station of Klinushki, from there to Sergievo, and from
      Sergievo, with horses, thirty miles to the coal mines that belong to a
      horrid man, a general called Shashkovsky. My brothers have got me the post
      of superintendent there. . . . I am going to be a coal miner."
    

      "Stay, I know those mines. Shashkovsky is my uncle, you know. But . . .
      what are you going there for?" asked Mlle. Ilovaisky, looking at Liharev
      in surprise.
    

      "As superintendent. To superintend the coal mines."
    

      "I don't understand!" she shrugged her shoulders. "You are going to the
      mines. But you know, it's the bare steppe, a desert, so dreary that you
      couldn't exist a day there! It's horrible coal, no one will buy it, and my
      uncle's a maniac, a despot, a bankrupt . . . . You won't get your salary!"
    

      "No matter," said Liharev, unconcernedly, "I am thankful even for coal
      mines."
    

      She shrugged her shoulders, and walked about the room in agitation.
    

      "I don't understand, I don't understand," she said, moving her fingers
      before her face. "It's impossible, and . . . and irrational! You must
      understand that it's . . . it's worse than exile. It is a living tomb! O
      Heavens!" she said hotly, going up to Liharev and moving her fingers
      before his smiling face; her upper lip was quivering, and her sharp face
      turned pale, "Come, picture it, the bare steppe, solitude. There is no one
      to say a word to there, and you . . . are enthusiastic over women! Coal
      mines . . . and women!"
    

      Mlle. Ilovaisky was suddenly ashamed of her heat and, turning away from
      Liharev, walked to the window.
    

      "No, no, you can't go there," she said, moving her fingers rapidly over
      the pane.
    

      Not only in her heart, but even in her spine she felt that behind her
      stood an infinitely unhappy man, lost and outcast, while he, as though he
      were unaware of his unhappiness, as though he had not shed tears in the
      night, was looking at her with a kindly smile. Better he should go on
      weeping! She walked up and down the room several times in agitation, then
      stopped short in a corner and sank into thought. Liharev was saying
      something, but she did not hear him. Turning her back on him she took out
      of her purse a money note, stood for a long time crumpling it in her hand,
      and looking round at Liharev, blushed and put it in her pocket.
    

      The coachman's voice was heard through the door. With a stern,
      concentrated face she began putting on her things in silence. Liharev
      wrapped her up, chatting gaily, but every word he said lay on her heart
      like a weight. It is not cheering to hear the unhappy or the dying jest.
    

      When the transformation of a live person into a shapeless bundle had been
      completed, Mlle. Ilovaisky looked for the last time round the "travellers'
      room," stood a moment in silence, and slowly walked out. Liharev went to
      see her off. . . .
    

      Outside, God alone knows why, the winter was raging still. Whole clouds of
      big soft snowflakes were whirling restlessly over the earth, unable to
      find a resting-place. The horses, the sledge, the trees, a bull tied to a
      post, all were white and seemed soft and fluffy.
    

      "Well, God help you," muttered Liharev, tucking her into the sledge.
      "Don't remember evil against me . . . ."
    

      She was silent. When the sledge started, and had to go round a huge
      snowdrift, she looked back at Liharev with an expression as though she
      wanted to say something to him. He ran up to her, but she did not say a
      word to him, she only looked at him through her long eyelashes with little
      specks of snow on them.
    

      Whether his finely intuitive soul were really able to read that look, or
      whether his imagination deceived him, it suddenly began to seem to him
      that with another touch or two that girl would have forgiven him his
      failures, his age, his desolate position, and would have followed him
      without question or reasonings. He stood a long while as though rooted to
      the spot, gazing at the tracks left by the sledge runners. The snowflakes
      greedily settled on his hair, his beard, his shoulders. . . . Soon the
      track of the runners had vanished, and he himself covered with snow, began
      to look like a white rock, but still his eyes kept seeking something in
      the clouds of snow.
    

      ROTHSCHILD'S FIDDLE
    

      THE town was a little one, worse than a village, and it was inhabited by
      scarcely any but old people who died with an infrequency that was really
      annoying. In the hospital and in the prison fortress very few coffins were
      needed. In fact business was bad. If Yakov Ivanov had been an undertaker
      in the chief town of the province he would certainly have had a house of
      his own, and people would have addressed him as Yakov Matveyitch; here in
      this wretched little town people called him simply Yakov; his nickname in
      the street was for some reason Bronze, and he lived in a poor way like a
      humble peasant, in a little old hut in which there was only one room, and
      in this room he and Marfa, the stove, a double bed, the coffins, his
      bench, and all their belongings were crowded together.
    

      Yakov made good, solid coffins. For peasants and working people he made
      them to fit himself, and this was never unsuccessful, for there were none
      taller and stronger than he, even in the prison, though he was seventy.
      For gentry and for women he made them to measure, and used an iron
      foot-rule for the purpose. He was very unwilling to take orders for
      children's coffins, and made them straight off without measurements,
      contemptuously, and when he was paid for the work he always said:
    

      "I must confess I don't like trumpery jobs."
    

      Apart from his trade, playing the fiddle brought him in a small income.
    

      The Jews' orchestra conducted by Moisey Ilyitch Shahkes, the tinsmith, who
      took more than half their receipts for himself, played as a rule at
      weddings in the town. As Yakov played very well on the fiddle, especially
      Russian songs, Shahkes sometimes invited him to join the orchestra at a
      fee of half a rouble a day, in addition to tips from the visitors. When
      Bronze sat in the orchestra first of all his face became crimson and
      perspiring; it was hot, there was a suffocating smell of garlic, the
      fiddle squeaked, the double bass wheezed close to his right ear, while the
      flute wailed at his left, played by a gaunt, red-haired Jew who had a
      perfect network of red and blue veins all over his face, and who bore the
      name of the famous millionaire Rothschild. And this accursed Jew contrived
      to play even the liveliest things plaintively. For no apparent reason
      Yakov little by little became possessed by hatred and contempt for the
      Jews, and especially for Rothschild; he began to pick quarrels with him,
      rail at him in unseemly language and once even tried to strike him, and
      Rothschild was offended and said, looking at him ferociously:
    

      "If it were not that I respect you for your talent, I would have sent you
      flying out of the window."
    

      Then he began to weep. And because of this Yakov was not often asked to
      play in the orchestra; he was only sent for in case of extreme necessity
      in the absence of one of the Jews.
    

      Yakov was never in a good temper, as he was continually having to put up
      with terrible losses. For instance, it was a sin to work on Sundays or
      Saints' days, and Monday was an unlucky day, so that in the course of the
      year there were some two hundred days on which, whether he liked it or
      not, he had to sit with his hands folded. And only think, what a loss that
      meant. If anyone in the town had a wedding without music, or if Shahkes
      did not send for Yakov, that was a loss, too. The superintendent of the
      prison was ill for two years and was wasting away, and Yakov was
      impatiently waiting for him to die, but the superintendent went away to
      the chief town of the province to be doctored, and there took and died.
      There's a loss for you, ten roubles at least, as there would have been an
      expensive coffin to make, lined with brocade. The thought of his losses
      haunted Yakov, especially at night; he laid his fiddle on the bed beside
      him, and when all sorts of nonsensical ideas came into his mind he touched
      a string; the fiddle gave out a sound in the darkness, and he felt better.
    

      On the sixth of May of the previous year Marfa had suddenly been taken
      ill. The old woman's breathing was laboured, she drank a great deal of
      water, and she staggered as she walked, yet she lighted the stove in the
      morning and even went herself to get water. Towards evening she lay down.
      Yakov played his fiddle all day; when it was quite dark he took the book
      in which he used every day to put down his losses, and, feeling dull, he
      began adding up the total for the year. It came to more than a thousand
      roubles. This so agitated him that he flung the reckoning beads down, and
      trampled them under his feet. Then he picked up the reckoning beads, and
      again spent a long time clicking with them and heaving deep, strained
      sighs. His face was crimson and wet with perspiration. He thought that if
      he had put that lost thousand roubles in the bank, the interest for a year
      would have been at least forty roubles, so that forty roubles was a loss
      too. In fact, wherever one turned there were losses and nothing else.
    

      "Yakov!" Marfa called unexpectedly. "I am dying."
    

      He looked round at his wife. Her face was rosy with fever, unusually
      bright and joyful-looking. Bronze, accustomed to seeing her face always
      pale, timid, and unhappy-looking, was bewildered. It looked as if she
      really were dying and were glad that she was going away for ever from that
      hut, from the coffins, and from Yakov. . . . And she gazed at the ceiling
      and moved her lips, and her expression was one of happiness, as though she
      saw death as her deliverer and were whispering with him.
    

      It was daybreak; from the windows one could see the flush of dawn. Looking
      at the old woman, Yakov for some reason reflected that he had not once in
      his life been affectionate to her, had had no feeling for her, had never
      once thought to buy her a kerchief, or to bring her home some dainty from
      a wedding, but had done nothing but shout at her, scold her for his
      losses, shake his fists at her; it is true he had never actually beaten
      her, but he had frightened her, and at such times she had always been numb
      with terror. Why, he had forbidden her to drink tea because they spent too
      much without that, and she drank only hot water. And he understood why she
      had such a strange, joyful face now, and he was overcome with dread.
    

      As soon as it was morning he borrowed a horse from a neighbour and took
      Marfa to the hospital. There were not many patients there, and so he had
      not long to wait, only three hours. To his great satisfaction the patients
      were not being received by the doctor, who was himself ill, but by the
      assistant, Maxim Nikolaitch, an old man of whom everyone in the town used
      to say that, though he drank and was quarrelsome, he knew more than the
      doctor.
    

      "I wish you good-day," said Yakov, leading his old woman into the
      consulting room. "You must excuse us, Maxim Nikolaitch, we are always
      troubling you with our trumpery affairs. Here you see my better half is
      ailing, the partner of my life, as they say, excuse the expression. . . ."
    

      Knitting his grizzled brows and stroking his whiskers the assistant began
      to examine the old woman, and she sat on a stool, a wasted, bent figure
      with a sharp nose and open mouth, looking like a bird that wants to drink.
    

      "H---m . . . Ah! . . ." the assistant said slowly, and he heaved a sigh.
      "Influenza and possibly fever. There's typhus in the town now. Well, the
      old woman has lived her life, thank God. . . . How old is she?"
    

      "She'll be seventy in another year, Maxim Nikolaitch."
    

      "Well, the old woman has lived her life, it's time to say good-bye."
    

      "You are quite right in what you say, of course, Maxim Nikolaitch," said
      Yakov, smiling from politeness, "and we thank you feelingly for your
      kindness, but allow me to say every insect wants to live."
    

      "To be sure," said the assistant, in a tone which suggested that it
      depended upon him whether the woman lived or died. "Well, then, my good
      fellow, put a cold compress on her head, and give her these powders twice
      a day, and so good-bye. Bonjour."
    

      From the expression of his face Yakov saw that it was a bad case, and that
      no sort of powders would be any help; it was clear to him that Marfa would
      die very soon, if not to-day, to-morrow. He nudged the assistant's elbow,
      winked at him, and said in a low voice:
    

      "If you would just cup her, Maxim Nikolaitch."
    

      "I have no time, I have no time, my good fellow. Take your old woman and
      go in God's name. Goodbye."
    

      "Be so gracious," Yakov besought him. "You know yourself that if, let us
      say, it were her stomach or her inside that were bad, then powders or
      drops, but you see she had got a chill! In a chill the first thing is to
      let blood, Maxim Nikolaitch."
    

      But the assistant had already sent for the next patient, and a peasant
      woman came into the consulting room with a boy.
    

      "Go along! go along," he said to Yakov, frowning. "It's no use to-"
    

      "In that case put on leeches, anyway! Make us pray for you for ever."
    

      The assistant flew into a rage and shouted:
    

      "You speak to me again! You blockhead. . . ."
    

      Yakov flew into a rage too, and he turned crimson all over, but he did not
      utter a word. He took Marfa on his arm and led her out of the room. Only
      when they were sitting in the cart he looked morosely and ironically at
      the hospital, and said:
    

      "A nice set of artists they have settled here! No fear, but he would have
      cupped a rich man, but even a leech he grudges to the poor. The Herods!"
    

      When they got home and went into the hut, Marfa stood for ten minutes
      holding on to the stove. It seemed to her that if she were to lie down
      Yakov would talk to her about his losses, and scold her for lying down and
      not wanting to work. Yakov looked at her drearily and thought that
      to-morrow was St. John the Divine's, and next day St. Nikolay the
      Wonder-worker's, and the day after that was Sunday, and then Monday, an
      unlucky day. For four days he would not be able to work, and most likely
      Marfa would die on one of those days; so he would have to make the coffin
      to-day. He picked up his iron rule, went up to the old woman and took her
      measure. Then she lay down, and he crossed himself and began making the
      coffin.
    

      When the coffin was finished Bronze put on his spectacles and wrote in his
      book: "Marfa Ivanov's coffin, two roubles, forty kopecks."
    

      And he heaved a sigh. The old woman lay all the time silent with her eyes
      closed. But in the evening, when it got dark, she suddenly called the old
      man.
    

      "Do you remember, Yakov," she asked, looking at him joyfully. "Do you
      remember fifty years ago God gave us a little baby with flaxen hair? We
      used always to be sitting by the river then, singing songs . . . under the
      willows," and laughing bitterly, she added: "The baby girl died."
    

      Yakov racked his memory, but could not remember the baby or the willows.
    

      "It's your fancy," he said.
    

      The priest arrived; he administered the sacrament and extreme unction.
      Then Marfa began muttering something unintelligible, and towards morning
      she died. Old women, neighbours, washed her, dressed her, and laid her in
      the coffin. To avoid paying the sacristan, Yakov read the psalms over the
      body himself, and they got nothing out of him for the grave, as the
      grave-digger was a crony of his. Four peasants carried the coffin to the
      graveyard, not for money, but from respect. The coffin was followed by old
      women, beggars, and a couple of crazy saints, and the people who met it
      crossed themselves piously. . . . And Yakov was very much pleased that it
      was so creditable, so decorous, and so cheap, and no offence to anyone. As
      he took his last leave of Marfa he touched the coffin and thought: "A good
      piece of work!"
    

      But as he was going back from the cemetery he was overcome by acute
      depression. He didn't feel quite well: his breathing was laboured and
      feverish, his legs felt weak, and he had a craving for drink. And thoughts
      of all sorts forced themselves on his mind. He remembered again that all
      his life he had never felt for Marfa, had never been affectionate to her.
      The fifty-two years they had lived in the same hut had dragged on a long,
      long time, but it had somehow happened that in all that time he had never
      once thought of her, had paid no attention to her, as though she had been
      a cat or a dog. And yet, every day, she had lighted the stove, had cooked
      and baked, had gone for the water, had chopped the wood, had slept with
      him in the same bed, and when he came home drunk from the weddings always
      reverently hung his fiddle on the wall and put him to bed, and all this in
      silence, with a timid, anxious expression.
    

      Rothschild, smiling and bowing, came to meet Yakov.
    

      "I was looking for you, uncle," he said. "Moisey Ilyitch sends you his
      greetings and bids you come to him at once."
    

      Yakov felt in no mood for this. He wanted to cry.
    

      "Leave me alone," he said, and walked on.
    

      "How can you," Rothschild said, fluttered, running on in front. "Moisey
      Ilyitch will be offended! He bade you come at once!"
    

      Yakov was revolted at the Jew's gasping for breath and blinking, and
      having so many red freckles on his face. And it was disgusting to look at
      his green coat with black patches on it, and all his fragile, refined
      figure.
    

      "Why are you pestering me, garlic?" shouted Yakov. "Don't persist!"
    

      The Jew got angry and shouted too:
    

      "Not so noisy, please, or I'll send you flying over the fence!"
    

      "Get out of my sight!" roared Yakov, and rushed at him with his fists.
      "One can't live for you scabby Jews!"
    

      Rothschild, half dead with terror, crouched down and waved his hands over
      his head, as though to ward off a blow; then he leapt up and ran away as
      fast as his legs could carry him: as he ran he gave little skips and kept
      clasping his hands, and Yakov could see how his long thin spine wriggled.
      Some boys, delighted at the incident, ran after him shouting "Jew! Jew!"
      Some dogs joined in the chase barking. Someone burst into a roar of
      laughter, then gave a whistle; the dogs barked with even more noise and
      unanimity. Then a dog must have bitten Rothschild, as a desperate, sickly
      scream was heard.
    

      Yakov went for a walk on the grazing ground, then wandered on at random in
      the outskirts of the town, while the street boys shouted:
    

      "Here's Bronze! Here's Bronze!"
    

      He came to the river, where the curlews floated in the air uttering shrill
      cries and the ducks quacked. The sun was blazing hot, and there was a
      glitter from the water, so that it hurt the eyes to look at it. Yakov
      walked by a path along the bank and saw a plump, rosy-cheeked lady come
      out of the bathing-shed, and thought about her: "Ugh! you otter!"
    

      Not far from the bathing-shed boys were catching crayfish with bits of
      meat; seeing him, they began shouting spitefully, "Bronze! Bronze!" And
      then he saw an old spreading willow-tree with a big hollow in it, and a
      crow's nest on it. . . . And suddenly there rose up vividly in Yakov's
      memory a baby with flaxen hair, and the willow-tree Marfa had spoken of.
      Why, that is it, the same willow-tree-green, still, and sorrowful. . . .
      How old it has grown, poor thing!
    

      He sat down under it and began to recall the past. On the other bank,
      where now there was the water meadow, in those days there stood a big
      birchwood, and yonder on the bare hillside that could be seen on the
      horizon an old, old pine forest used to be a bluish patch in the distance.
      Big boats used to sail on the river. But now it was all smooth and
      unruffled, and on the other bank there stood now only one birch-tree,
      youthful and slender like a young lady, and there was nothing on the river
      but ducks and geese, and it didn't look as though there had ever been
      boats on it. It seemed as though even the geese were fewer than of old.
      Yakov shut his eyes, and in his imagination huge flocks of white geese
      soared, meeting one another.
    

      He wondered how it had happened that for the last forty or fifty years of
      his life he had never once been to the river, or if he had been by it he
      had not paid attention to it. Why, it was a decent sized river, not a
      trumpery one; he might have gone in for fishing and sold the fish to
      merchants, officials, and the bar-keeper at the station, and then have put
      money in the bank; he might have sailed in a boat from one house to
      another, playing the fiddle, and people of all classes would have paid to
      hear him; he might have tried getting big boats afloat again-that would be
      better than making coffins; he might have bred geese, killed them and sent
      them in the winter to Moscow. Why, the feathers alone would very likely
      mount up to ten roubles in the year. But he had wasted his time, he had
      done nothing of this. What losses! Ah! What losses! And if he had gone in
      for all those things at once-catching fish and playing the fiddle, and
      running boats and killing geese-what a fortune he would have made! But
      nothing of this had happened, even in his dreams; life had passed
      uselessly without any pleasure, had been wasted for nothing, not even a
      pinch of snuff; there was nothing left in front, and if one looked
      back-there was nothing there but losses, and such terrible ones, it made
      one cold all over. And why was it a man could not live so as to avoid
      these losses and misfortunes? One wondered why they had cut down the birch
      copse and the pine forest. Why was he walking with no reason on the
      grazing ground? Why do people always do what isn't needful? Why had Yakov
      all his life scolded, bellowed, shaken his fists, ill-treated his wife,
      and, one might ask, what necessity was there for him to frighten and
      insult the Jew that day? Why did people in general hinder each other from
      living? What losses were due to it! what terrible losses! If it were not
      for hatred and malice people would get immense benefit from one another.
    

      In the evening and the night he had visions of the baby, of the willow, of
      fish, of slaughtered geese, and Marfa looking in profile like a bird that
      wants to drink, and the pale, pitiful face of Rothschild, and faces moved
      down from all sides and muttered of losses. He tossed from side to side,
      and got out of bed five times to play the fiddle.
    

      In the morning he got up with an effort and went to the hospital. The same
      Maxim Nikolaitch told him to put a cold compress on his head, and gave him
      some powders, and from his tone and expression of face Yakov realized that
      it was a bad case and that no powders would be any use. As he went home
      afterwards, he reflected that death would be nothing but a benefit; he
      would not have to eat or drink, or pay taxes or offend people, and, as a
      man lies in his grave not for one year but for hundreds and thousands, if
      one reckoned it up the gain would be enormous. A man's life meant loss:
      death meant gain. This reflection was, of course, a just one, but yet it
      was bitter and mortifying; why was the order of the world so strange, that
      life, which is given to man only once, passes away without benefit?
    

      He was not sorry to die, but at home, as soon as he saw his fiddle, it
      sent a pang to his heart and he felt sorry. He could not take the fiddle
      with him to the grave, and now it would be left forlorn, and the same
      thing would happen to it as to the birch copse and the pine forest.
      Everything in this world was wasted and would be wasted! Yakov went out of
      the hut and sat in the doorway, pressing the fiddle to his bosom. Thinking
      of his wasted, profitless life, he began to play, he did not know what,
      but it was plaintive and touching, and tears trickled down his cheeks. And
      the harder he thought, the more mournfully the fiddle wailed.
    

      The latch clicked once and again, and Rothschild appeared at the gate. He
      walked across half the yard boldly, but seeing Yakov he stopped short, and
      seemed to shrink together, and probably from terror, began making signs
      with his hands as though he wanted to show on his fingers what o'clock it
      was.
    

      "Come along, it's all right," said Yakov in a friendly tone, and he
      beckoned him to come up. "Come along!"
    

      Looking at him mistrustfully and apprehensively, Rothschild began to
      advance, and stopped seven feet off.
    

      "Be so good as not to beat me," he said, ducking. "Moisey Ilyitch has sent
      me again. 'Don't be afraid,' he said; 'go to Yakov again and tell him,' he
      said, 'we can't get on without him.' There is a wedding on Wednesday. . .
      . Ye--es! Mr. Shapovalov is marrying his daughter to a good man. . . . And
      it will be a grand wedding, oo-oo!" added the Jew, screwing up one eye.
    

      "I can't come," said Yakov, breathing hard. "I'm ill, brother."
    

      And he began playing again, and the tears gushed from his eyes on to the
      fiddle. Rothschild listened attentively, standing sideways to him and
      folding his arms on his chest. The scared and perplexed expression on his
      face, little by little, changed to a look of woe and suffering; he rolled
      his eyes as though he were experiencing an agonizing ecstasy, and
      articulated, "Vachhh!" and tears slowly ran down his cheeks and trickled
      on his greenish coat.
    

      And Yakov lay in bed all the rest of the day grieving. In the evening,
      when the priest confessing him asked, Did he remember any special sin he
      had committed? straining his failing memory he thought again of Marfa's
      unhappy face, and the despairing shriek of the Jew when the dog bit him,
      and said, hardly audibly, "Give the fiddle to Rothschild."
    

      "Very well," answered the priest.
    

      And now everyone in the town asks where Rothschild got such a fine fiddle.
      Did he buy it or steal it? Or perhaps it had come to him as a pledge. He
      gave up the flute long ago, and now plays nothing but the fiddle. As
      plaintive sounds flow now from his bow, as came once from his flute, but
      when he tries to repeat what Yakov played, sitting in the doorway, the
      effect is something so sad and sorrowful that his audience weep, and he
      himself rolls his eyes and articulates "Vachhh! . . ." And this new air
      was so much liked in the town that the merchants and officials used to be
      continually sending for Rothschild and making him play it over and over
      again a dozen times.
    

      IVAN MATVEYITCH
    

      BETWEEN five and six in the evening. A fairly well-known man of
      learning-we will call him simply the man of learning-is sitting in his
      study nervously biting his nails.
    

      "It's positively revolting," he says, continually looking at his watch.
      "It shows the utmost disrespect for another man's time and work. In
      England such a person would not earn a farthing, he would die of hunger.
      You wait a minute, when you do come . . . ."
    

      And feeling a craving to vent his wrath and impatience upon someone, the
      man of learning goes to the door leading to his wife's room and knocks.
    

      "Listen, Katya," he says in an indignant voice. "If you see Pyotr
      Danilitch, tell him that decent people don't do such things. It's
      abominable! He recommends a secretary, and does not know the sort of man
      he is recommending! The wretched boy is two or three hours late with
      unfailing regularity every day. Do you call that a secretary? Those two or
      three hours are more precious to me than two or three years to other
      people. When he does come I will swear at him like a dog, and won't pay
      him and will kick him out. It's no use standing on ceremony with people
      like that!"
    

      "You say that every day, and yet he goes on coming and coming."
    

      "But to-day I have made up my mind. I have lost enough through him. You
      must excuse me, but I shall swear at him like a cabman."
    

      At last a ring is heard. The man of learning makes a grave face; drawing
      himself up, and, throwing back his head, he goes into the entry. There his
      amanuensis Ivan Matveyitch, a young man of eighteen, with a face oval as
      an egg and no moustache, wearing a shabby, mangy overcoat and no goloshes,
      is already standing by the hatstand. He is in breathless haste, and
      scrupulously wipes his huge clumsy boots on the doormat, trying as he does
      so to conceal from the maidservant a hole in his boot through which a
      white sock is peeping. Seeing the man of learning he smiles with that
      broad, prolonged, somewhat foolish smile which is seen only on the faces
      of children or very good-natured people.
    

      "Ah, good evening!" he says, holding out a big wet hand. "Has your sore
      throat gone?"
    

      "Ivan Matveyitch," says the man of learning in a shaking voice, stepping
      back and clasping his hands together. "Ivan Matveyitch."
    

      Then he dashes up to the amanuensis, clutches him by the shoulders, and
      begins feebly shaking him.
    

      "What a way to treat me!" he says with despair in his voice. "You
      dreadful, horrid fellow, what a way to treat me! Are you laughing at me,
      are you jeering at me? Eh?"
    

      Judging from the smile which still lingered on his face Ivan Matveyitch
      had expected a very different reception, and so, seeing the man of
      learning's countenance eloquent of indignation, his oval face grows longer
      than ever, and he opens his mouth in amazement.
    

      "What is . . . what is it?" he asks.
    

      "And you ask that?" the man of learning clasps his hands. "You know how
      precious time is to me, and you are so late. You are two hours late! . . .
      Have you no fear of God?"
    

      "I haven't come straight from home," mutters Ivan Matveyitch, untying his
      scarf irresolutely. "I have been at my aunt's name-day party, and my aunt
      lives five miles away. . . . If I had come straight from home, then it
      would have been a different thing."
    

      "Come, reflect, Ivan Matveyitch, is there any logic in your conduct? Here
      you have work to do, work at a fixed time, and you go flying off after
      name-day parties and aunts! But do make haste and undo your wretched
      scarf! It's beyond endurance, really!"
    

      The man of learning dashes up to the amanuensis again and helps him to
      disentangle his scarf.
    

      "You are done up like a peasant woman, . . . Come along, . . . Please make
      haste!"
    

      Blowing his nose in a dirty, crumpled-up handkerchief and pulling down his
      grey reefer jacket, Ivan Matveyitch goes through the hall and the
      drawing-room to the study. There a place and paper and even cigarettes had
      been put ready for him long ago.
    

      "Sit down, sit down," the man of learning urges him on, rubbing his hands
      impatiently. "You are an unsufferable person. . . . You know the work has
      to be finished by a certain time, and then you are so late. One is forced
      to scold you. Come, write, . . . Where did we stop?"
    

      Ivan Matveyitch smooths his bristling cropped hair and takes up his pen.
      The man of learning walks up and down the room, concentrates himself, and
      begins to dictate:
    

      "The fact is . . . comma . . . that so to speak fundamental forms . . .
      have you written it? . . . forms are conditioned entirely by the essential
      nature of those principles . . . comma . . . which find in them their
      expression and can only be embodied in them . . . . New line, . . .
      There's a stop there, of course. . . . More independence is found . . . is
      found . . . by the forms which have not so much a political . . . comma .
      . . as a social character . ."
    

      "The high-school boys have a different uniform now . . . a grey one," said
      Ivan Matveyitch, "when I was at school it was better: they used to wear
      regular uniforms."
    

      "Oh dear, write please!" says the man of learning wrathfully. "Character .
      . . have you written it? Speaking of the forms relating to the
      organization . . . of administrative functions, and not to the regulation
      of the life of the people . . . comma . . . it cannot be said that they
      are marked by the nationalism of their forms . . . the last three words in
      inverted commas. . . . Aie, aie . . . tut, tut . . . so what did you want
      to say about the high school?"
    

      "That they used to wear a different uniform in my time."
    

      "Aha! . . . indeed, . . . Is it long since you left the high school?"
    

      "But I told you that yesterday. It is three years since I left school. . .
      . I left in the fourth class."
    

      "And why did you give up high school?" asks the man of learning, looking
      at Ivan Matveyitch's writing.
    

      "Oh, through family circumstances."
    

      "Must I speak to you again, Ivan Matveyitch? When will you get over your
      habit of dragging out the lines? There ought not to be less than forty
      letters in a line."
    

      "What, do you suppose I do it on purpose?" says Ivan Matveyitch, offended.
      "There are more than forty letters in some of the other lines. . . . You
      count them. And if you think I don't put enough in the line, you can take
      something off my pay."
    

      "Oh dear, that's not the point. You have no delicacy, really. . . . At the
      least thing you drag in money. The great thing is to be exact, Ivan
      Matveyitch, to be exact is the great thing. You ought to train yourself to
      be exact."
    

      The maidservant brings in a tray with two glasses of tea on it, and a
      basket of rusks. . . . Ivan Matveyitch takes his glass awkwardly with both
      hands, and at once begins drinking it. The tea is too hot. To avoid
      burning his mouth Ivan Matveyitch tries to take a tiny sip. He eats one
      rusk, then a second, then a third, and, looking sideways, with
      embarrassment, at the man of learning, timidly stretches after a fourth. .
      . . The noise he makes in swallowing, the relish with which he smacks his
      lips, and the expression of hungry greed in his raised eyebrows irritate
      the man of learning.
    

      "Make haste and finish, time is precious."
    

      "You dictate, I can drink and write at the same time. . . . I must confess
      I was hungry."
    

      "I should think so after your walk!"
    

      "Yes, and what wretched weather! In our parts there is a scent of spring
      by now. . . . There are puddles everywhere; the snow is melting."
    

      "You are a southerner, I suppose?"
    

      "From the Don region. . . . It's quite spring with us by March. Here it is
      frosty, everyone's in a fur coat, . . . but there you can see the grass .
      . . it's dry everywhere, and one can even catch tarantulas."
    

      "And what do you catch tarantulas for?"
    

      "Oh! . . . to pass the time . . ." says Ivan Matveyitch, and he sighs.
      "It's fun catching them. You fix a bit of pitch on a thread, let it down
      into their hole and begin hitting the tarantula on the back with the
      pitch, and the brute gets cross, catches hold of the pitch with his claws,
      and gets stuck. . . . And what we used to do with them! We used to put a
      basinful of them together and drop a bihorka in with them."
    

      "What is a bihorka?"
    

      "That's another spider, very much the same as a tarantula. In a fight one
      of them can kill a hundred tarantulas."
    

      "H'm! . . . But we must write, . . . Where did we stop?"
    

      The man of learning dictates another twenty lines, then sits plunged in
      meditation.
    

      Ivan Matveyitch, waiting while the other cogitates, sits and, craning his
      neck, puts the collar of his shirt to rights. His tie will not set
      properly, the stud has come out, and the collar keeps coming apart.
    

      "H'm! . . ." says the man of learning. "Well, haven't you found a job yet,
      Ivan Matveyitch?"
    

      "No. And how is one to find one? I am thinking, you know, of volunteering
      for the army. But my father advises my going into a chemist's."
    

      "H'm! . . . But it would be better for you to go into the university. The
      examination is difficult, but with patience and hard work you could get
      through. Study, read more. . . . Do you read much?"
    

      "Not much, I must own . . ." says Ivan Matveyitch, lighting a cigarette.
    

      "Have you read Turgenev?"
    

      "N-no. . . ."
    

      "And Gogol?"
    

      "Gogol. H'm! . . . Gogol. . . . No, I haven't read him!"
    

      "Ivan Matveyitch! Aren't you ashamed? Aie! aie! You are such a nice
      fellow, so much that is original in you . . . you haven't even read Gogol!
      You must read him! I will give you his works! It's essential to read him!
      We shall quarrel if you don't!"
    

      Again a silence follows. The man of learning meditates, half reclining on
      a soft lounge, and Ivan Matveyitch, leaving his collar in peace,
      concentrates his whole attention on his boots. He has not till then
      noticed that two big puddles have been made by the snow melting off his
      boots on the floor. He is ashamed.
    

      "I can't get on to-day . . ." mutters the man of learning. "I suppose you
      are fond of catching birds, too, Ivan Matveyitch?"
    

      "That's in autumn, . . . I don't catch them here, but there at home I
      always did."
    

      "To be sure . . . very good. But we must write, though."
    

      The man of learning gets up resolutely and begins dictating, but after ten
      lines sits down on the lounge again.
    

      "No. . . . Perhaps we had better put it off till to-morrow morning," he
      says. "Come to-morrow morning, only come early, at nine o'clock. God
      preserve you from being late!"
    

      Ivan Matveyitch lays down his pen, gets up from the table and sits in
      another chair. Five minutes pass in silence, and he begins to feel it is
      time for him to go, that he is in the way; but in the man of learning's
      study it is so snug and light and warm, and the impression of the nice
      rusks and sweet tea is still so fresh that there is a pang at his heart at
      the mere thought of home. At home there is poverty, hunger, cold, his
      grumbling father, scoldings, and here it is so quiet and unruffled, and
      interest even is taken in his tarantulas and birds.
    

      The man of learning looks at his watch and takes up a book.
    

      "So you will give me Gogol?' says Ivan Matveyitch, getting up.
    

      "Yes, yes! But why are you in such a hurry, my dear boy? Sit down and tell
      me something . . ."
    

      Ivan Matveyitch sits down and smiles broadly. Almost every evening he sits
      in this study and always feels something extraordinarily soft, attracting
      him, as it were akin, in the voice and the glance of the man of learning.
      There are moments when he even fancies that the man of learning is
      becoming attached to him, used to him, and that if he scolds him for being
      late, it's simply because he misses his chatter about tarantulas and how
      they catch goldfinches on the Don.
    

      ZINOTCHKA
    

      THE party of sportsmen spent the night in a peasant's hut on some newly
      mown hay. The moon peeped in at the window; from the street came the
      mournful wheezing of a concertina; from the hay came a sickly sweet,
      faintly troubling scent. The sportsmen talked about dogs, about women,
      about first love, and about snipe. After all the ladies of their
      acquaintance had been picked to pieces, and hundreds of stories had been
      told, the stoutest of the sportsmen, who looked in the darkness like a
      haycock, and who talked in the mellow bass of a staff officer, gave a loud
      yawn and said:
    

      "It is nothing much to be loved; the ladies are created for the purpose of
      loving us men. But, tell me, has any one of you fellows been
      hated-passionately, furiously hated? Has any one of you watched the
      ecstasies of hatred? Eh?"
    

      No answer followed.
    

      "Has no one, gentlemen?" asked the staff officer's bass voice. "But I,
      now, have been hated, hated by a pretty girl, and have been able to study
      the symptoms of first hatred directed against myself. It was the first,
      because it was something exactly the converse of first love. What I am
      going to tell, however, happened when I knew nothing about love or hate. I
      was eight at the time, but that made no difference; in this case it was
      not he but she that mattered. Well, I beg your attention.
      One fine summer evening, just before sunset, I was sitting in the nursery,
      doing my lesson with my governess, Zinotchka, a very charming and poetical
      creature who had left boarding school not long before. Zinotchka looked
      absent-mindedly towards the window and said:
    

      "'Yes. We breathe in oxygen; now tell me, Petya, what do we breathe out?'
    

      "'Carbonic acid gas,' I answered, looking towards the same window.
    

      "'Right,' assented Zinotchka. 'Plants, on the contrary, breathe in
      carbonic acid gas, and breathe out oxygen. Carbonic acid gas is contained
      in seltzer water, and in the fumes from the samovar. . . . It is a very
      noxious gas. Near Naples there is the so-called Cave of Dogs, which
      contains carbonic acid gas; a dog dropped into it is suffocated and dies.'
    

      "This luckless Cave of Dogs near Naples is a chemical marvel beyond which
      no governess ventures to go. Zinotchka always hotly maintained the
      usefulness of natural science, but I doubt if she knew any chemistry
      beyond this Cave.
    

      "Well, she told me to repeat it. I repeated it. She asked me what was
      meant by the horizon. I answered. And meantime, while we were ruminating
      over the horizon and the Cave, in the yard below, my father was just
      getting ready to go shooting. The dogs yapped, the trace horses shifted
      from one leg to another impatiently and coquetted with the coachman, the
      footman packed the waggonette with parcels and all sorts of things. Beside
      the waggonette stood a brake in which my mother and sisters were sitting
      to drive to a name-day party at the Ivanetskys'. No one was left in the
      house but Zinotchka, me, and my eldest brother, a student, who had
      toothache. You can imagine my envy and my boredom.
    

      "'Well, what do we breathe in?' asked Zinotchka, looking at the window.
    

      "'Oxygen. . .'
    

      "'Yes. And the horizon is the name given to the place where it seems to us
      as though the earth meets the sky.'
    

      "Then the waggonette drove off, and after it the brake. . . . I saw
      Zinotchka take a note out of her pocket, crumple it up convulsively and
      press it to her temple, then she flushed crimson and looked at her watch.
    

      "'So, remember,' she said, 'that near Naples is the so-called Cave of
      Dogs. . . .' She glanced at her watch again and went on: 'where the sky
      seems to us to meet the earth. . . .'
    

      "The poor girl in violent agitation walked about the room, and once more
      glanced at her watch. There was another half-hour before the end of our
      lesson.
    

      "'Now arithmetic,' she said, breathing hard and turning over the pages of
      the sum-book with a trembling hand. 'Come, you work out problem 325 and I
      . . . will be back directly.'
    

      "She went out. I heard her scurry down the stairs, and then I saw her dart
      across the yard in her blue dress and vanish through the garden gate. The
      rapidity of her movements, the flush on her cheeks and her excitement,
      aroused my curiosity. Where had she run, and what for? Being intelligent
      beyond my years I soon put two and two together, and understood it all:
      she had run into the garden, taking advantage of the absence of my stern
      parents, to steal in among the raspberry bushes, or to pick herself some
      cherries. If that were so, dash it all, I would go and have some cherries
      too. I threw aside the sum-book and ran into the garden. I ran to the
      cherry orchard, but she was not there. Passing by the raspberries, the
      gooseberries, and the watchman's shanty, she crossed the kitchen garden
      and reached the pond, pale, and starting at every sound. I stole after
      her, and what I saw, my friends, was this. At the edge of the pond,
      between the thick stumps of two old willows, stood my elder brother,
      Sasha; one could not see from his face that he had toothache. He looked
      towards Zinotchka as she approached him, and his whole figure was lighted
      up by an expression of happiness as though by sunshine. And Zinotchka, as
      though she were being driven into the Cave of Dogs, and were being forced
      to breathe carbonic acid gas, walked towards him, scarcely able to move
      one leg before the other, breathing hard, with her head thrown back. . . .
      To judge from appearances she was going to a rendezous for the first time
      in her life. But at last she reached him. . . . For half a minute they
      gazed at each other in silence, as though they could not believe their
      eyes. Thereupon some force seemed to shove Zinotchka; she laid her hands
      on Sasha's shoulders and let her head droop upon his waistcoat. Sasha
      laughed, muttered something incoherent, and with the clumsiness of a man
      head over ears in love, laid both hands on Zinotchka's face. And the
      weather, gentlemen, was exquisite. . . . The hill behind which the sun was
      setting, the two willows, the green bank, the sky-all together with Sasha
      and Zinotchka were reflected in the pond . . . perfect stillness . . . you
      can imagine it. Millions of butterflies with long whiskers gleamed golden
      above the reeds; beyond the garden they were driving the cattle. In fact,
      it was a perfect picture.
    

      "Of all I had seen the only thing I understood was that Sasha was kissing
      Zinotchka. That was improper. If maman heard of it they would both
      catch it. Feeling for some reason ashamed I went back to the nursery, not
      waiting for the end of the rendezvous. There I sat over the sum-book,
      pondered and reflected. A triumphant smile strayed upon my countenance. On
      one side it was agreeable to be the possessor of another person's secret;
      on the other it was also very agreeable that such authorities as Sasha and
      Zinotchka might at any moment be convicted by me of ignorance of the
      social proprieties. Now they were in my power, and their peace was
      entirely dependent on my magnanimity. I'd let them know.
    

      "When I went to bed, Zinotchka came into the nursery as usual to find out
      whether I had dropped asleep without undressing and whether I had said my
      prayers. I looked at her pretty, happy face and grinned. I was bursting
      with my secret and itching to let it out. I had to drop a hint and enjoy
      the effect.
    

      "'I know,' I said, grinning. 'Gy-y.'
    

      "'What do you know?'
    

      "'Gy-y! I saw you near the willows kissing Sasha. I followed you and saw
      it all.'
    

      "Zinotchka started, flushed all over, and overwhelmed by 'my hint' she
      sank down on the chair, on which stood a glass of water and a candlestick.
    

      "'I saw you . . . kissing . . .' I repeated, sniggering and enjoying her
      confusion. 'Aha! I'll tell mamma!'
    

      "Cowardly Zinotchka gazed at me intently, and convincing herself that I
      really did know all about it, clutched my hand in despair and muttered in
      a trembling whisper:
    

      "'Petya, it is low. . . . I beg of you, for God's sake. . . . Be a man . .
      . don't tell anyone. . . . Decent people don't spy . . . . It's low. . . .
      I entreat you.'
    

      "The poor girl was terribly afraid of my mother, a stern and virtuous
      lady-that was one thing; and the second was that my grinning countenance
      could not but outrage her first love so pure and poetical, and you can
      imagine the state of her heart. Thanks to me, she did not sleep a wink all
      night, and in the morning she appeared at breakfast with blue rings round
      her eyes. When I met Sasha after breakfast I could not refrain from
      grinning and boasting:
    

      "'I know! I saw you yesterday kissing Mademoiselle Zina!'
    

      "Sasha looked at me and said:
    

      "'You are a fool.'
    

      "He was not so cowardly as Zinotchka, and so my effect did not come off.
      That provoked me to further efforts. If Sasha was not frightened it was
      evident that he did not believe that I had seen and knew all about it;
      wait a bit, I would show him.
    

      "At our lessons before dinner Zinotchka did not look at me, and her voice
      faltered. Instead of trying to scare me she tried to propitiate me in
      every way, giving me full marks, and not complaining to my father of my
      naughtiness. Being intelligent beyond my years I exploited her secret: I
      did not learn my lessons, walked into the schoolroom on my head, and said
      all sorts of rude things. In fact, if I had remained in that vein till
      to-day I should have become a famous blackmailer. Well, a week passed.
      Another person's secret irritated and fretted me like a splinter in my
      soul. I longed at all costs to blurt it out and gloat over the effect. And
      one day at dinner, when we had a lot of visitors, I gave a stupid snigger,
      looked fiendishly at Zinotchka and said:
    

      "'I know. Gy-y! I saw! . . .'
    

      "'What do you know?' asked my mother.
    

      "I looked still more fiendishly at Zinotchka and Sasha. You ought to have
      seen how the girl flushed up, and how furious Sasha's eyes were! I bit my
      tongue and did not go on. Zinotchka gradually turned pale, clenched her
      teeth, and ate no more dinner. At our evening lessons that day I noticed a
      striking change in Zinotchka's face. It looked sterner, colder, as it
      were, more like marble, while her eyes gazed strangely straight into my
      face, and I give you my word of honour I have never seen such terrible,
      annihilating eyes, even in hounds when they overtake the wolf. I
      understood their expression perfectly, when in the middle of a lesson she
      suddenly clenched her teeth and hissed through them:
    

      "'I hate you! Oh, you vile, loathsome creature, if you knew how I hate
      you, how I detest your cropped head, your vulgar, prominent ears!'
    

      "But at once she took fright and said:
    

      "'I am not speaking to you, I am repeating a part out of a play. . . .'
    

      "Then, my friends, at night I saw her come to my bedside and gaze a long
      time into my face. She hated me passionately, and could not exist away
      from me. The contemplation of my hated pug of a face had become a
      necessity to her. I remember a lovely summer evening . . . with the scent
      of hay, perfect stillness, and so on. The moon was shining. I was walking
      up and down the avenue, thinking of cherry jam. Suddenly Zinotchka,
      looking pale and lovely, came up to me, she caught hold of my hand, and
      breathlessly began expressing herself:
    

      "'Oh, how I hate you! I wish no one harm as I do you! Let me tell you
      that! I want you to understand that!'
    

      "You understand, moonlight, her pale face, breathless with passion, the
      stillness . . . little pig as I was I actually enjoyed it. I listened to
      her, looked at her eyes. . . . At first I liked it, and enjoyed the
      novelty. Then I was suddenly seized with terror, I gave a scream, and ran
      into the house at breakneck speed.
    

      "I made up my mind that the best thing to do was to complain to maman.
      And I did complain, mentioning incidentally how Sasha had kissed
      Zinotchka. I was stupid, and did not know what would follow, or I should
      have kept the secret to myself. . . . After hearing my story maman
      flushed with indignation and said:
    

      "'It is not your business to speak about that, you are still very young. .
      . . But, what an example for children.'
    

      "My maman was not only virtuous but diplomatic. To avoid a scandal
      she did not get rid of Zinotchka at once, but set to work gradually,
      systematically, to pave the way for her departure, as one does with
      well-bred but intolerable people. I remember that when Zinotchka did leave
      us the last glance she cast at the house was directed at the window at
      which I was sitting, and I assure you, I remember that glance to this day.
    

      "Zinotchka soon afterwards became my brother's wife. She is the Zinaida
      Nikolaevna whom you know. The next time I met her I was already an ensign.
      In spite of all her efforts she could not recognize the hated Petya in the
      ensign with his moustache, but still she did not treat me quite like a
      relation. . . . And even now, in spite of my good-humoured baldness, meek
      corpulence, and unassuming air, she still looks askance at me, and feels
      put out when I go to see my brother. Hatred it seems can no more be
      forgotten than love. . . .
    

      "Tchoo! I hear the cock crowing! Good-night. Milord! Lie down!"
    

      BAD WEATHER
    

      BIG raindrops were pattering on the dark windows. It was one of those
      disgusting summer holiday rains which, when they have begun, last a long
      time-for weeks, till the frozen holiday maker grows used to it, and sinks
      into complete apathy. It was cold; there was a feeling of raw, unpleasant
      dampness. The mother-in-law of a lawyer, called Kvashin, and his wife,
      Nadyezhda Filippovna, dressed in waterproofs and shawls, were sitting over
      the dinner table in the dining-room. It was written on the countenance of
      the elder lady that she was, thank God, well-fed, well-clothed and in good
      health, that she had married her only daughter to a good man, and now
      could play her game of patience with an easy conscience; her daughter, a
      rather short, plump, fair young woman of twenty, with a gentle anÃ¦mic
      face, was reading a book with her elbows on the table; judging from her
      eyes she was not so much reading as thinking her own thoughts, which were
      not in the book. Neither of them spoke. There was the sound of the
      pattering rain, and from the kitchen they could hear the prolonged yawns
      of the cook.
    

      Kvashin himself was not at home. On rainy days he did not come to the
      summer villa, but stayed in town; damp, rainy weather affected his
      bronchitis and prevented him from working. He was of the opinion that the
      sight of the grey sky and the tears of rain on the windows deprived one of
      energy and induced the spleen. In the town, where there was greater
      comfort, bad weather was scarcely noticed.
    

      After two games of patience, the old lady shuffled the cards and took a
      glance at her daughter.
    

      "I have been trying with the cards whether it will be fine to-morrow, and
      whether our Alexey Stepanovitch will come," she said. "It is five days
      since he was here. . . . The weather is a chastisement from God."
    

      Nadyezhda Filippovna looked indifferently at her mother, got up, and began
      walking up and down the room.
    

      "The barometer was rising yesterday," she said doubtfully, "but they say
      it is falling again to-day."
    

      The old lady laid out the cards in three long rows and shook her head.
    

      "Do you miss him?" she asked, glancing at her daughter.
    

      "Of course."
    

      "I see you do. I should think so. He hasn't been here for five days. In
      May the utmost was two, or at most three days, and now it is serious, five
      days! I am not his wife, and yet I miss him. And yesterday, when I heard
      the barometer was rising, I ordered them to kill a chicken and prepare a
      carp for Alexey Stepanovitch. He likes them. Your poor father couldn't
      bear fish, but he likes it. He always eats it with relish."
    

      "My heart aches for him," said the daughter. "We are dull, but it is
      duller still for him, you know, mamma."
    

      "I should think so! In the law-courts day in and day out, and in the empty
      flat at night alone like an owl."
    

      "And what is so awful, mamma, he is alone there without servants; there is
      no one to set the samovar or bring him water. Why didn't he engage a valet
      for the summer months? And what use is the summer villa at all if he does
      not care for it? I told him there was no need to have it, but no, 'It is
      for the sake of your health,' he said, and what is wrong with my health?
      It makes me ill that he should have to put up with so much on my account."
    

      Looking over her mother's shoulder, the daughter noticed a mistake in the
      patience, bent down to the table and began correcting it. A silence
      followed. Both looked at the cards and imagined how their Alexey
      Stepanovitch, utterly forlorn, was sitting now in the town in his gloomy,
      empty study and working, hungry, exhausted, yearning for his family. . . .
    

      "Do you know what, mamma?" said Nadyezhda Filippovna suddenly, and her
      eyes began to shine. "If the weather is the same to-morrow I'll go by the
      first train and see him in town! Anyway, I shall find out how he is, have
      a look at him, and pour out his tea."
    

      And both of them began to wonder how it was that this idea, so simple and
      easy to carry out, had not occurred to them before. It was only half an
      hour in the train to the town, and then twenty minutes in a cab. They said
      a little more, and went off to bed in the same room, feeling more
      contented.
    

      "Oho-ho-ho. . . . Lord, forgive us sinners!" sighed the old lady when the
      clock in the hall struck two. "There is no sleeping."
    

      "You are not asleep, mamma?" the daughter asked in a whisper. "I keep
      thinking of Alyosha. I only hope he won't ruin his health in town.
      Goodness knows where he dines and lunches. In restaurants and taverns."
    

      "I have thought of that myself," sighed the old lady. "The Heavenly Mother
      save and preserve him. But the rain, the rain!"
    

      In the morning the rain was not pattering on the panes, but the sky was
      still grey. The trees stood looking mournful, and at every gust of wind
      they scattered drops. The footprints on the muddy path, the ditches and
      the ruts were full of water. Nadyezhda Filippovna made up her mind to go.
    

      "Give him my love," said the old lady, wrapping her daughter up. "Tell him
      not to think too much about his cases. . . . And he must rest. Let him
      wrap his throat up when he goes out: the weather-God help us! And take him
      the chicken; food from home, even if cold, is better than at a
      restaurant."
    

      The daughter went away, saying that she would come back by an evening
      train or else next morning.
    

      But she came back long before dinner-time, when the old lady was sitting
      on her trunk in her bedroom and drowsily thinking what to cook for her
      son-in-law's supper.
    

      Going into the room her daughter, pale and agitated, sank on the bed
      without uttering a word or taking off her hat, and pressed her head into
      the pillow.
    

      "But what is the matter," said the old lady in surprise, "why back so
      soon? Where is Alexey Stepanovitch?"
    

      Nadyezhda Filippovna raised her head and gazed at her mother with dry,
      imploring eyes.
    

      "He is deceiving us, mamma," she said.
    

      "What are you saying? Christ be with you!" cried the old lady in alarm,
      and her cap slipped off her head. "Who is going to deceive us? Lord, have
      mercy on us!"
    

      "He is deceiving us, mamma!" repeated her daughter, and her chin began to
      quiver.
    

      "How do you know?" cried the old lady, turning pale.
    

      "Our flat is locked up. The porter tells me that Alyosha has not been home
      once for these five days. He is not living at home! He is not at home, not
      at home!"
    

      She waved her hands and burst into loud weeping, uttering nothing but:
      "Not at home! Not at home!"
    

      She began to be hysterical.
    

      "What's the meaning of it?" muttered the old woman in horror. "Why, he
      wrote the day before yesterday that he never leaves the flat! Where is he
      sleeping? Holy Saints!"
    

      Nadyezhda Filippovna felt so faint that she could not take off her hat.
      She looked about her blankly, as though she had been drugged, and
      convulsively clutched at her mother's arms.
    

      "What a person to trust: a porter!" said the old lady, fussing round her
      daughter and crying. "What a jealous girl you are! He is not going to
      deceive you, and how dare he? We are not just anybody. Though we are of
      the merchant class, yet he has no right, for you are his lawful wife! We
      can take proceedings! I gave twenty thousand roubles with you! You did not
      want for a dowry!"
    

      And the old lady herself sobbed and gesticulated, and she felt faint, too,
      and lay down on her trunk. Neither of them noticed that patches of blue
      had made their appearance in the sky, that the clouds were more
      transparent, that the first sunbeam was cautiously gliding over the wet
      grass in the garden, that with renewed gaiety the sparrows were hopping
      about the puddles which reflected the racing clouds.
    

      Towards evening Kvashin arrived. Before leaving town he had gone to his
      flat and had learned from the porter that his wife had come in his
      absence.
    

      "Here I am," he said gaily, coming into his mother-in-law's room and
      pretending not to notice their stern and tear-stained faces. "Here I am!
      It's five days since we have seen each other!"
    

      He rapidly kissed his wife's hand and his mother-in-law's, and with the
      air of a man delighted at having finished a difficult task, he lolled in
      an arm-chair.
    

      "Ough!" he said, puffing out all the air from his lungs. "Here I have been
      worried to death. I have scarcely sat down. For almost five days now I
      have been, as it were, bivouacking. I haven't been to the flat once, would
      you believe it? I have been busy the whole time with the meeting of
      Shipunov's and Ivantchikov's creditors; I had to work in Galdeyev's office
      at the shop. . . . I've had nothing to eat or to drink, and slept on a
      bench, I was chilled through . . . . I hadn't a free minute. I hadn't even
      time to go to the flat. That's how I came not to be at home, Nadyusha. . .
      And Kvashin, holding his sides as though his back were aching, glanced
      stealthily at his wife and mother-in-law to see the effect of his lie, or
      as he called it, diplomacy. The mother-in-law and wife were looking at
      each other in joyful astonishment, as though beyond all hope and
      expectation they had found something precious, which they had lost. . . .
      Their faces beamed, their eyes glowed. . . .
    

      "My dear man," cried the old lady, jumping up, "why am I sitting here?
      Tea! Tea at once! Perhaps you are hungry?"
    

      "Of course he is hungry," cried his wife, pulling off her head a bandage
      soaked in vinegar. "Mamma, bring the wine, and the savouries. Natalya, lay
      the table! Oh, my goodness, nothing is ready!"
    

      And both of them, frightened, happy, and bustling, ran about the room. The
      old lady could not look without laughing at her daughter who had slandered
      an innocent man, and the daughter felt ashamed. . . .
    

      The table was soon laid. Kvashin, who smelt of madeira and liqueurs and
      who could scarcely breathe from repletion, complained of being hungry,
      forced himself to munch and kept on talking of the meeting of Shipunov's
      and Ivantchikov's creditors, while his wife and mother-in-law could not
      take their eyes off his face, and both thought:
    

      "How clever and kind he is! How handsome!"
    

      "All serene," thought Kvashin, as he lay down on the well-filled feather
      bed. "Though they are regular tradesmen's wives, though they are
      Philistines, yet they have a charm of their own, and one can spend a day
      or two of the week here with enjoyment. . . ."
    

      He wrapped himself up, got warm, and as he dozed off, he said to himself:
    

      "All serene!"
    

      A GENTLEMAN FRIEND
    

      THE charming Vanda, or, as she was described in her passport, the
      "Honourable Citizen Nastasya Kanavkin," found herself, on leaving the
      hospital, in a position she had never been in before: without a home to go
      to or a farthing in her pocket. What was she to do?
    

      The first thing she did was to visit a pawn-broker's and pawn her
      turquoise ring, her one piece of jewellery. They gave her a rouble for the
      ring . . . but what can you get for a rouble? You can't buy for that sum a
      fashionable short jacket, nor a big hat, nor a pair of bronze shoes, and
      without those things she had a feeling of being, as it were, undressed.
      She felt as though the very horses and dogs were staring and laughing at
      the plainness of her dress. And clothes were all she thought about: the
      question what she should eat and where she should sleep did not trouble
      her in the least.
    

      "If only I could meet a gentleman friend," she thought to herself, "I
      could get some money. . . . There isn't one who would refuse me, I know. .
      ."
    

      But no gentleman she knew came her way. It would be easy enough to meet
      them in the evening at the "Renaissance," but they wouldn't let her in at
      the "Renaissance" in that shabby dress and with no hat. What was she to
      do?
    

      After long hesitation, when she was sick of walking and sitting and
      thinking, Vanda made up her mind to fall back on her last resource: to go
      straight to the lodgings of some gentleman friend and ask for money.
    

      She pondered which to go to. "Misha is out of the question; he's a married
      man. . . . The old chap with the red hair will be at his office at this
      time. . ."
    

      Vanda remembered a dentist, called Finkel, a converted Jew, who six months
      ago had given her a bracelet, and on whose head she had once emptied a
      glass of beer at the supper at the German Club. She was awfully pleased at
      the thought of Finkel.
    

      "He'll be sure to give it me, if only I find him at home," she thought, as
      she walked in his direction. "If he doesn't, I'll smash all the lamps in
      the house."
    

      Before she reached the dentist's door she thought out her plan of action:
      she would run laughing up the stairs, dash into the dentist's room and
      demand twenty-five roubles. But as she touched the bell, this plan seemed
      to vanish from her mind of itself. Vanda began suddenly feeling frightened
      and nervous, which was not at all her way. She was bold and saucy enough
      at drinking parties, but now, dressed in everyday clothes, feeling herself
      in the position of an ordinary person asking a favour, who might be
      refused admittance, she felt suddenly timid and humiliated. She was
      ashamed and frightened.
    

      "Perhaps he has forgotten me by now," she thought, hardly daring to pull
      the bell. "And how can I go up to him in such a dress, looking like a
      beggar or some working girl?"
    

      And she rang the bell irresolutely.
    

      She heard steps coming: it was the porter.
    

      "Is the doctor at home?" she asked.
    

      She would have been glad now if the porter had said "No," but the latter,
      instead of answering ushered her into the hall, and helped her off with
      her coat. The staircase impressed her as luxurious, and magnificent, but
      of all its splendours what caught her eye most was an immense
      looking-glass, in which she saw a ragged figure without a fashionable
      jacket, without a big hat, and without bronze shoes. And it seemed strange
      to Vanda that, now that she was humbly dressed and looked like a laundress
      or sewing girl, she felt ashamed, and no trace of her usual boldness and
      sauciness remained, and in her own mind she no longer thought of herself
      as Vanda, but as the Nastasya Kanavkin she used to be in the old days. . .
      .
    

      "Walk in, please," said a maidservant, showing her into the
      consulting-room. "The doctor will be here in a minute. Sit down."
    

      Vanda sank into a soft arm-chair.
    

      "I'll ask him to lend it me," she thought; "that will be quite proper,
      for, after all, I do know him. If only that servant would go. I don't like
      to ask before her. What does she want to stand there for?"
    

      Five minutes later the door opened and Finkel came in. He was a tall, dark
      Jew, with fat cheeks and bulging eyes. His cheeks, his eyes, his chest,
      his body, all of him was so well fed, so loathsome and repellent! At the
      "Renaissance" and the German Club he had usually been rather tipsy, and
      would spend his money freely on women, and be very long-suffering and
      patient with their pranks (when Vanda, for instance, poured the beer over
      his head, he simply smiled and shook his finger at her): now he had a
      cross, sleepy expression and looked solemn and frigid like a police
      captain, and he kept chewing something.
    

      "What can I do for you?" he asked, without looking at Vanda.
    

      Vanda looked at the serious countenance of the maid and the smug figure of
      Finkel, who apparently did not recognize her, and she turned red.
    

      "What can I do for you?" repeated the dentist a little irritably.
    

      "I've got toothache," murmured Vanda.
    

      "Aha! . . . Which is the tooth? Where?"
    

      Vanda remembered she had a hole in one of her teeth.
    

      "At the bottom . . . on the right . . ." she said.
    

      "Hm! . . . Open your mouth."
    

      Finkel frowned and, holding his breath, began examining the tooth.
    

      "Does it hurt?" he asked, digging into it with a steel instrument.
    

      "Yes," Vanda replied, untruthfully.
    

      "Shall I remind him?" she was wondering. "He would be sure to remember me.
      But that servant! Why will she stand there?"
    

      Finkel suddenly snorted like a steam-engine right into her mouth, and
      said:
    

      "I don't advise you to have it stopped. That tooth will never be worth
      keeping anyhow."
    

      After probing the tooth a little more and soiling Vanda's lips and gums
      with his tobacco-stained fingers, he held his breath again, and put
      something cold into her mouth. Vanda suddenly felt a sharp pain, cried
      out, and clutched at Finkel's hand.
    

      "It's all right, it's all right," he muttered; "don't you be frightened!
      That tooth would have been no use to you, anyway . . . you must be brave.
      . ."
    

      And his tobacco-stained fingers, smeared with blood, held up the tooth to
      her eyes, while the maid approached and put a basin to her mouth.
    

      "You wash out your mouth with cold water when you get home, and that will
      stop the bleeding," said Finkel.
    

      He stood before her with the air of a man expecting her to go, waiting to
      be left in peace.
    

      "Good-day," she said, turning towards the door.
    

      "Hm! . . . and how about my fee?" enquired Finkel, in a jesting tone.
    

      "Oh, yes!" Vanda remembered, blushing, and she handed the Jew the rouble
      that had been given her for her ring.
    

      When she got out into the street she felt more overwhelmed with shame than
      before, but now it was not her poverty she was ashamed of. She was
      unconscious now of not having a big hat and a fashionable jacket. She
      walked along the street, spitting blood, and brooding on her life, her
      ugly, wretched life, and the insults she had endured, and would have to
      endure to-morrow, and next week, and all her life, up to the very day of
      her death.
    

      "Oh! how awful it is! My God, how fearful!"
    

      Next day, however, she was back at the "Renaissance," and dancing there.
      She had on an enormous new red hat, a new fashionable jacket, and bronze
      shoes. And she was taken out to supper by a young merchant up from Kazan.
    

      A TRIVIAL INCIDENT
    

      IT was a sunny August midday as, in company with a Russian prince who had
      come down in the world, I drove into the immense so-called Shabelsky
      pine-forest where we were intending to look for woodcocks. In virtue of
      the part he plays in this story my poor prince deserves a detailed
      description. He was a tall, dark man, still youngish, though already
      somewhat battered by life; with long moustaches like a police captain's;
      with prominent black eyes, and with the manners of a retired army man. He
      was a man of Oriental type, not very intelligent, but straightforward and
      honest, not a bully, not a fop, and not a rake-virtues which, in the eyes
      of the general public, are equivalent to a certificate of being a
      nonentity and a poor creature. People generally did not like him (he was
      never spoken of in the district, except as "the illustrious duffer"). I
      personally found the poor prince extremely nice with his misfortunes and
      failures, which made up indeed his whole life. First of all he was poor.
      He did not play cards, did not drink, had no occupation, did not poke his
      nose into anything, and maintained a perpetual silence but yet he had
      somehow succeeded in getting through thirty to forty thousand roubles left
      him at his father's death. God only knows what had become of the money.
      All that I can say is that owing to lack of supervision a great deal was
      stolen by stewards, bailiffs, and even footmen; a great deal went on
      lending money, giving bail, and standing security. There were few
      landowners in the district who did not owe him money. He gave to all who
      asked, and not so much from good nature or confidence in people as from
      exaggerated gentlemanliness as though he would say: "Take it and feel how
      comme il faut I am!" By the time I made his acquaintance he had got
      into debt himself, had learned what it was like to have a second mortgage
      on his land, and had sunk so deeply into difficulties that there was no
      chance of his ever getting out of them again. There were days when he had
      no dinner, and went about with an empty cigar-holder, but he was always
      seen clean and fashionably dressed, and always smelt strongly of
      ylang-ylang.
    

      The prince's second misfortune was his absolute solitariness. He was not
      married, he had no friends nor relations. His silent and reserved
      character and his comme il faut deportment, which became the more
      conspicuous the more anxious he was to conceal his poverty, prevented him
      from becoming intimate with people. For love affairs he was too heavy,
      spiritless, and cold, and so rarely got on with women. . . .
    

      When we reached the forest this prince and I got out of the chaise and
      walked along a narrow woodland path which was hidden among huge ferns. But
      before we had gone a hundred paces a tall, lank figure with a long oval
      face, wearing a shabby reefer jacket, a straw hat, and patent leather
      boots, rose up from behind a young fir-tree some three feet high, as
      though he had sprung out of the ground. The stranger held in one hand a
      basket of mushrooms, with the other he playfully fingered a cheap
      watch-chain on his waistcoat. On seeing us he was taken aback, smoothed
      his waistcoat, coughed politely, and gave an agreeable smile, as though he
      were delighted to see such nice people as us. Then, to our complete
      surprise, he came up to us, scraping with his long feet on the grass,
      bending his whole person, and, still smiling agreeably, lifted his hat and
      pronounced in a sugary voice with the intonations of a whining dog:
    

      "Aie, aie . . . gentlemen, painful as it is, it is my duty to warn you
      that shooting is forbidden in this wood. Pardon me for venturing to
      disturb you, though unacquainted, but . . . allow me to present myself. I
      am Grontovsky, the head clerk on Madame Kandurin's estate."
    

      "Pleased to make your acquaintance, but why can't we shoot?"
    

      "Such is the wish of the owner of this forest!"
    

      The prince and I exchanged glances. A moment passed in silence. The prince
      stood looking pensively at a big fly agaric at his feet, which he had
      crushed with his stick. Grontovsky went on smiling agreeably. His whole
      face was twitching, exuding honey, and even the watch-chain on his
      waistcoat seemed to be smiling and trying to impress us all with its
      refinement. A shade of embarrassment passed over us like an angel passing;
      all three of us felt awkward.
    

      "Nonsense!" I said. "Only last week I was shooting here!"
    

      "Very possible!" Grontovsky sniggered through his teeth. "As a matter of
      fact everyone shoots here regardless of the prohibition. But once I have
      met you, it is my duty . . . my sacred duty to warn you. I am a man in a
      dependent position. If the forest were mine, on the word of honour of a
      Grontovsky, I should not oppose your agreeable pleasure. But whose fault
      is it that I am in a dependent position?"
    

      The lanky individual sighed and shrugged his shoulders. I began arguing,
      getting hot and protesting, but the more loudly and impressively I spoke
      the more mawkish and sugary Grontovsky's face became. Evidently the
      consciousness of a certain power over us afforded him the greatest
      gratification. He was enjoying his condescending tone, his politeness, his
      manners, and with peculiar relish pronounced his sonorous surname, of
      which he was probably very fond. Standing before us he felt more than at
      ease, but judging from the confused sideway glances he cast from time to
      time at his basket, only one thing was spoiling his satisfaction-the
      mushrooms, womanish, peasantish, prose, derogatory to his dignity.
    

      "We can't go back!" I said. "We have come over ten miles!"
    

      "What's to be done?" sighed Grontovsky. "If you had come not ten but a
      hundred thousand miles, if the king even had come from America or from
      some other distant land, even then I should think it my duty . . . sacred,
      so to say, obligation . . ."
    

      "Does the forest belong to Nadyezhda Lvovna?" asked the prince.
    

      "Yes, Nadyezhda Lvovna . . ."
    

      "Is she at home now?"
    

      "Yes . . . I tell you what, you go to her, it is not more than half a mile
      from here; if she gives you a note, then I. . . . I needn't say! Ha-ha . .
      . he-he-!"
    

      "By all means," I agreed. "It's much nearer than to go back. . . . You go
      to her, Sergey Ivanitch," I said, addressing the prince. "You know her."
    

      The prince, who had been gazing the whole time at the crushed agaric,
      raised his eyes to me, thought a minute, and said:
    

      "I used to know her at one time, but . . . it's rather awkward for me to
      go to her. Besides, I am in shabby clothes. . . . You go, you don't know
      her. . . . It's more suitable for you to go."
    

      I agreed. We got into our chaise and, followed by Grontovsky's smiles,
      drove along the edge of the forest to the manor house. I was not
      acquainted with Nadyezhda Lvovna Kandurin, nÃ©e Shabelsky. I had never seen
      her at close quarters, and knew her only by hearsay. I knew that she was
      incredibly wealthy, richer than anyone else in the province. After the
      death of her father, Shabelsky, who was a landowner with no other
      children, she was left with several estates, a stud farm, and a lot of
      money. I had heard that, though she was only twenty-five or twenty-six,
      she was ugly, uninteresting, and as insignificant as anybody, and was only
      distinguished from the ordinary ladies of the district by her immense
      wealth.
    

      It has always seemed to me that wealth is felt, and that the rich must
      have special feelings unknown to the poor. Often as I passed by Nadyezhda
      Lvovna's big fruit garden, in which stood the large, heavy house with its
      windows always curtained, I thought: "What is she thinking at this moment?
      Is there happiness behind those blinds?" and so on. Once I saw her from a
      distance in a fine light cabriolet, driving a handsome white horse, and,
      sinful man that I am, I not only envied her, but even thought that in her
      poses, in her movements, there was something special, not to be found in
      people who are not rich, just as persons of a servile nature succeed in
      discovering "good family" at the first glance in people of the most
      ordinary exterior, if they are a little more distinguished than
      themselves. Nadyezhda Lvovna's inner life was only known to me by scandal.
      It was said in the district that five or six years ago, before she was
      married, during her father's lifetime, she had been passionately in love
      with Prince Sergey Ivanitch, who was now beside me in the chaise. The
      prince had been fond of visiting her father, and used to spend whole days
      in his billiard room, where he played pyramids indefatigably till his arms
      and legs ached. Six months before the old man's death he had suddenly
      given up visiting the Shabelskys. The gossip of the district having no
      positive facts to go upon explained this abrupt change in their relations
      in various ways. Some said that the prince, having observed the plain
      daughter's feeling for him and being unable to reciprocate it, considered
      it the duty of a gentleman to cut short his visits. Others maintained that
      old Shabelsky had discovered why his daughter was pining away, and had
      proposed to the poverty-stricken prince that he should marry her; the
      prince, imagining in his narrow-minded way that they were trying to buy
      him together with his title, was indignant, said foolish things, and
      quarrelled with them. What was true and what was false in this nonsense
      was difficult to say. But that there was a portion of truth in it was
      evident, from the fact that the prince always avoided conversation about
      Nadyezhda Lvovna.
    

      I knew that soon after her father's death Nadyezhda Lvovna had married one
      Kandurin, a bachelor of law, not wealthy, but adroit, who had come on a
      visit to the neighbourhood. She married him not from love, but because she
      was touched by the love of the legal gentleman who, so it was said, had
      cleverly played the love-sick swain. At the time I am describing, Kandurin
      was for some reason living in Cairo, and writing thence to his friend, the
      marshal of the district, "Notes of Travel," while she sat languishing
      behind lowered blinds, surrounded by idle parasites, and whiled away her
      dreary days in petty philanthropy.
    

      On the way to the house the prince fell to talking.
    

      "It's three days since I have been at home," he said in a half whisper,
      with a sidelong glance at the driver. "I am not a child, nor a silly
      woman, and I have no prejudices, but I can't stand the bailiffs. When I
      see a bailiff in my house I turn pale and tremble, and even have a
      twitching in the calves of my legs. Do you know Rogozhin refused to honour
      my note?"
    

      The prince did not, as a rule, like to complain of his straitened
      circumstances; where poverty was concerned he was reserved and exceedingly
      proud and sensitive, and so this announcement surprised me. He stared a
      long time at the yellow clearing, warmed by the sun, watched a long string
      of cranes float in the azure sky, and turned facing me.
    

      "And by the sixth of September I must have the money ready for the bank .
      . . the interest for my estate," he said aloud, by now regardless of the
      coachman. "And where am I to get it? Altogether, old man, I am in a tight
      fix! An awfully tight fix!"
    

      The prince examined the cock of his gun, blew on it for some reason, and
      began looking for the cranes which by now were out of sight.
    

      "Sergey Ivanitch," I asked, after a minute's silence, "imagine if they
      sell your Shatilovka, what will you do?"
    

      "I? I don't know! Shatilovka can't be saved, that's clear as daylight, but
      I cannot imagine such a calamity. I can't imagine myself without my daily
      bread secure. What can I do? I have had hardly any education; I have not
      tried working yet; for government service it is late to begin, . . .
      Besides, where could I serve? Where could I be of use? Admitting that no
      great cleverness is needed for serving in our Zemstvo, for example, yet I
      suffer from . . . the devil knows what, a sort of faintheartedness, I
      haven't a ha'p'orth of pluck. If I went into the Service I should always
      feel I was not in my right place. I am not an idealist; I am not a
      Utopian; I haven't any special principles; but am simply, I suppose,
      stupid and thoroughly incompetent, a neurotic and a coward. Altogether not
      like other people. All other people are like other people, only I seem to
      be something . . . a poor thing. . . . I met Naryagin last Wednesday-you
      know him?-drunken, slovenly . . . doesn't pay his debts, stupid" (the
      prince frowned and tossed his head) . . . "a horrible person! He said to
      me, staggering: 'I'm being balloted for as a justice of the peace!' Of
      course, they won't elect him, but, you see, he believes he is fit to be a
      justice of the peace and considers that position within his capacity. He
      has boldness and self-confidence. I went to see our investigating
      magistrate too. The man gets two hundred and fifty roubles a month, and
      does scarcely anything. All he can do is to stride backwards and forwards
      for days together in nothing but his underclothes, but, ask him, he is
      convinced he is doing his work and honourably performing his duty. I
      couldn't go on like that! I should be ashamed to look the clerk in the
      face."
    

      At that moment Grontovsky, on a chestnut horse, galloped by us with a
      flourish. On his left arm the basket bobbed up and down with the mushrooms
      dancing in it. As he passed us he grinned and waved his hand, as though we
      were old friends.
    

      "Blockhead!" the prince filtered through his teeth, looking after him.
      "It's wonderful how disgusting it sometimes is to see satisfied faces. A
      stupid, animal feeling due to hunger, I expect. . . . What was I saying?
      Oh, yes, about going into the Service, . . . I should be ashamed to take
      the salary, and yet, to tell the truth, it is stupid. If one looks at it
      from a broader point of view, more seriously, I am eating what isn't mine
      now. Am I not? But why am I not ashamed of that. . . . It is a case of
      habit, I suppose . . . and not being able to realize one's true position.
      . . . But that position is most likely awful. . ."
    

      I looked at him, wondering if the prince were showing off. But his face
      was mild and his eyes were mournfully following the movements of the
      chestnut horse racing away, as though his happiness were racing away with
      it.
    

      Apparently he was in that mood of irritation and sadness when women weep
      quietly for no reason, and men feel a craving to complain of themselves,
      of life, of God. . . .
    

      When I got out of the chaise at the gates of the house the prince said to
      me:
    

      "A man once said, wanting to annoy me, that I have the face of a
      cardsharper. I have noticed that cardsharpers are usually dark. Do you
      know, it seems that if I really had been born a cardsharper I should have
      remained a decent person to the day of my death, for I should never have
      had the boldness to do wrong. I tell you frankly I have had the chance
      once in my life of getting rich if I had told a lie, a lie to myself and
      one woman . . . and one other person whom I know would have forgiven me
      for lying; I should have put into my pocket a million. But I could not. I
      hadn't the pluck!"
    

      From the gates we had to go to the house through the copse by a long road,
      level as a ruler, and planted on each side with thick, lopped lilacs. The
      house looked somewhat heavy, tasteless, like a faÃ§ade on the stage. It
      rose clumsily out of a mass of greenery, and caught the eye like a great
      stone thrown on the velvety turf. At the chief entrance I was met by a fat
      old footman in a green swallow-tail coat and big silver-rimmed spectacles;
      without making any announcement, only looking contemptuously at my dusty
      figure, he showed me in. As I mounted the soft carpeted stairs there was,
      for some reason, a strong smell of india-rubber. At the top I was
      enveloped in an atmosphere found only in museums, in signorial mansions
      and old-fashioned merchant houses; it seemed like the smell of something
      long past, which had once lived and died and had left its soul in the
      rooms. I passed through three or four rooms on my way from the entry to
      the drawing-room. I remember bright yellow, shining floors, lustres
      wrapped in stiff muslin, narrow, striped rugs which stretched not straight
      from door to door, as they usually do, but along the walls, so that not
      venturing to touch the bright floor with my muddy boots I had to describe
      a rectangle in each room. In the drawing-room, where the footman left me,
      stood old-fashioned ancestral furniture in white covers, shrouded in
      twilight. It looked surly and elderly, and, as though out of respect for
      its repose, not a sound was audible.
    

      Even the clock was silent . . . it seemed as though the Princess Tarakanov
      had fallen asleep in the golden frame, and the water and the rats were
      still and motionless through magic. The daylight, afraid of disturbing the
      universal tranquillity, scarcely pierced through the lowered blinds, and
      lay on the soft rugs in pale, slumbering streaks.
    

      Three minutes passed and a big, elderly woman in black, with her cheek
      bandaged up, walked noiselessly into the drawing-room. She bowed to me and
      pulled up the blinds. At once, enveloped in the bright sunlight, the rats
      and water in the picture came to life and movement, Princess Tarakanov was
      awakened, and the old chairs frowned gloomily.
    

      "Her honour will be here in a minute, sir . . ." sighed the old lady,
      frowning too.
    

      A few more minutes of waiting and I saw Nadyezhda Lvovna. What struck me
      first of all was that she certainly was ugly, short, scraggy, and
      round-shouldered. Her thick, chestnut hair was magnificent; her face, pure
      and with a look of culture in it, was aglow with youth; there was a clear
      and intelligent expression in her eyes; but the whole charm of her head
      was lost through the thickness of her lips and the over-acute facial
      angle.
    

      I mentioned my name, and announced the object of my visit.
    

      "I really don't know what I am to say!" she said, in hesitation, dropping
      her eyes and smiling. "I don't like to refuse, and at the same time. . .
      ."
    

      "Do, please," I begged.
    

      Nadyezhda Lvovna looked at me and laughed. I laughed too. She was probably
      amused by what Grontovsky had so enjoyed-that is, the right of giving or
      withholding permission; my visit suddenly struck me as queer and strange.
    

      "I don't like to break the long-established rules," said Madame Kandurin.
      "Shooting has been forbidden on our estate for the last six years. No!"
      she shook her head resolutely. "Excuse me, I must refuse you. If I allow
      you I must allow others. I don't like unfairness. Either let all or no
      one."
    

      "I am sorry!" I sighed. "It's all the sadder because we have come more
      than ten miles. I am not alone," I added, "Prince Sergey Ivanitch is with
      me."
    

      I uttered the prince's name with no arriÃ¨re pensÃ©e, not prompted by
      any special motive or aim; I simply blurted it out without thinking, in
      the simplicity of my heart. Hearing the familiar name Madame Kandurin
      started, and bent a prolonged gaze upon me. I noticed her nose turn pale.
    

      "That makes no difference . . ." she said, dropping her eyes.
    

      As I talked to her I stood at the window that looked out on the shrubbery.
      I could see the whole shrubbery with the avenues and the ponds and the
      road by which I had come. At the end of the road, beyond the gates, the
      back of our chaise made a dark patch. Near the gate, with his back to the
      house, the prince was standing with his legs apart, talking to the lanky
      Grontovsky.
    

      Madame Kandurin had been standing all the time at the other window. She
      looked from time to time towards the shrubbery, and from the moment I
      mentioned the prince's name she did not turn away from the window.
    

      "Excuse me," she said, screwing up her eyes as she looked towards the road
      and the gate, "but it would be unfair to allow you only to shoot. . . .
      And, besides, what pleasure is there in shooting birds? What's it for? Are
      they in your way?"
    

      A solitary life, immured within four walls, with its indoor twilight and
      heavy smell of decaying furniture, disposes people to sentimentality.
      Madame Kandurin's idea did her credit, but I could not resist saying:
    

      "If one takes that line one ought to go barefoot. Boots are made out of
      the leather of slaughtered animals."
    

      "One must distinguish between a necessity and a caprice," Madame Kandurin
      answered in a toneless voice.
    

      She had by now recognized the prince, and did not take her eyes off his
      figure. It is hard to describe the delight and the suffering with which
      her ugly face was radiant! Her eyes were smiling and shining, her lips
      were quivering and laughing, while her face craned closer to the panes.
      Keeping hold of a flower-pot with both hands, with bated breath and with
      one foot slightly lifted, she reminded me of a dog pointing and waiting
      with passionate impatience for "Fetch it!"
    

      I looked at her and at the prince who could not tell a lie once in his
      life, and I felt angry and bitter against truth and falsehood, which play
      such an elemental part in the personal happiness of men.
    

      The prince started suddenly, took aim and fired. A hawk, flying over him,
      fluttered its wings and flew like an arrow far away.
    

      "He aimed too high!" I said. "And so, Nadyezhda Lvovna," I sighed, moving
      away from the window, "you will not permit . . ."-Madame Kandurin was
      silent.
    

      "I have the honour to take my leave," I said, "and I beg you to forgive my
      disturbing you. . ."
    

      Madame Kandurin would have turned facing me, and had already moved through
      a quarter of the angle, when she suddenly hid her face behind the
      hangings, as though she felt tears in her eyes that she wanted to conceal.
    

      "Good-bye. . . . Forgive me . . ." she said softly.
    

      I bowed to her back, and strode away across the bright yellow floors, no
      longer keeping to the carpet. I was glad to get away from this little
      domain of gilded boredom and sadness, and I hastened as though anxious to
      shake off a heavy, fantastic dream with its twilight, its enchanted
      princess, its lustres. . . .
    

      At the front door a maidservant overtook me and thrust a note into my
      hand: "Shooting is permitted on showing this. N. K.," I read.
    



Love and Oher Stories







      LOVE
    

“THREE o’clock
      in the morning. The soft April night is looking in at my windows and
      caressingly winking at me with its stars. I can’t sleep, I am so
      happy!
    

      “My whole being from head to heels is bursting with a strange,
      incomprehensible feeling. I can’t analyse it just now—I haven’t
      the time, I’m too lazy, and there—hang analysis! Why, is a man
      likely to interpret his sensations when he is flying head foremost from a
      belfry, or has just learned that he has won two hundred thousand? Is he in
      a state to do it?”
    

      This was more or less how I began my love-letter to Sasha, a girl of
      nineteen with whom I had fallen in love. I began it five times, and as
      often tore up the sheets, scratched out whole pages, and copied it all
      over again. I spent as long over the letter as if it had been a novel I
      had to write to order. And it was not because I tried to make it longer,
      more elaborate, and more fervent, but because I wanted endlessly to
      prolong the process of this writing, when one sits in the stillness of one’s
      study and communes with one’s own day-dreams while the spring night
      looks in at one’s window. Between the lines I saw a beloved image,
      and it seemed to me that there were, sitting at the same table writing
      with me, spirits as naÃ¯vely happy, as foolish, and as blissfully smiling
      as I. I wrote continually, looking at my hand, which still ached
      deliciously where hers had lately pressed it, and if I turned my eyes away
      I had a vision of the green trellis of the little gate. Through that
      trellis Sasha gazed at me after I had said goodbye to her. When I was
      saying good-bye to Sasha I was thinking of nothing and was simply admiring
      her figure as every decent man admires a pretty woman; when I saw through
      the trellis two big eyes, I suddenly, as though by inspiration, knew that
      I was in love, that it was all settled between us, and fully decided
      already, that I had nothing left to do but to carry out certain
      formalities.
    

      It is a great delight also to seal up a love-letter, and, slowly putting
      on one’s hat and coat, to go softly out of the house and to carry
      the treasure to the post. There are no stars in the sky now: in their
      place there is a long whitish streak in the east, broken here and there by
      clouds above the roofs of the dingy houses; from that streak the whole sky
      is flooded with pale light. The town is asleep, but already the
      water-carts have come out, and somewhere in a far-away factory a whistle
      sounds to wake up the workpeople. Beside the postbox, slightly moist with
      dew, you are sure to see the clumsy figure of a house porter, wearing a
      bell-shaped sheepskin and carrying a stick. He is in a condition akin to
      catalepsy: he is not asleep or awake, but something between.
    

      If the boxes knew how often people resort to them for the decision of
      their fate, they would not have such a humble air. I, anyway, almost
      kissed my postbox, and as I gazed at it I reflected that the post is the
      greatest of blessings.
    

      I beg anyone who has ever been in love to remember how one usually hurries
      home after dropping the letter in the box, rapidly gets into bed and pulls
      up the quilt in the full conviction that as soon as one wakes up in the
      morning one will be overwhelmed with memories of the previous day and look
      with rapture at the window, where the daylight will be eagerly making its
      way through the folds of the curtain.
    

      Well, to facts. . . . Next morning at midday, Sasha’s maid brought
      me the following answer: “I am delited be sure to come to us to day
      please I shall expect you. Your S.”
    

      Not a single comma. This lack of punctuation, and the misspelling of the
      word “delighted,” the whole letter, and even the long, narrow
      envelope in which it was put filled my heart with tenderness. In the
      sprawling but diffident handwriting I recognised Sasha’s walk, her
      way of raising her eyebrows when she laughed, the movement of her lips. .
      . . But the contents of the letter did not satisfy me. In the first place,
      poetical letters are not answered in that way, and in the second, why
      should I go to Sasha’s house to wait till it should occur to her
      stout mamma, her brothers, and poor relations to leave us alone together?
      It would never enter their heads, and nothing is more hateful than to have
      to restrain one’s raptures simply because of the intrusion of some
      animate trumpery in the shape of a half-deaf old woman or little girl
      pestering one with questions. I sent an answer by the maid asking Sasha to
      select some park or boulevard for a rendezvous. My suggestion was readily
      accepted. I had struck the right chord, as the saying is.
    

      Between four and five o’clock in the afternoon I made my way to the
      furthest and most overgrown part of the park. There was not a soul in the
      park, and the tryst might have taken place somewhere nearer in one of the
      avenues or arbours, but women don’t like doing it by halves in
      romantic affairs; in for a penny, in for a pound—if you are in for a
      tryst, let it be in the furthest and most impenetrable thicket, where one
      runs the risk of stumbling upon some rough or drunken man. When I went up
      to Sasha she was standing with her back to me, and in that back I could
      read a devilish lot of mystery. It seemed as though that back and the nape
      of her neck, and the black spots on her dress were saying: Hush! . . . The
      girl was wearing a simple cotton dress over which she had thrown a light
      cape. To add to the air of mysterious secrecy, her face was covered with a
      white veil. Not to spoil the effect, I had to approach on tiptoe and speak
      in a half whisper.
    

      From what I remember now, I was not so much the essential point of the
      rendezvous as a detail of it. Sasha was not so much absorbed in the
      interview itself as in its romantic mysteriousness, my kisses, the silence
      of the gloomy trees, my vows. . . . There was not a minute in which she
      forgot herself, was overcome, or let the mysterious expression drop from
      her face, and really if there had been any Ivan Sidoritch or Sidor
      Ivanitch in my place she would have felt just as happy. How is one to make
      out in such circumstances whether one is loved or not? Whether the love is
      “the real thing” or not?
    

      From the park I took Sasha home with me. The presence of the beloved woman
      in one’s bachelor quarters affects one like wine and music. Usually
      one begins to speak of the future, and the confidence and self-reliance
      with which one does so is beyond bounds. You make plans and projects, talk
      fervently of the rank of general though you have not yet reached the rank
      of a lieutenant, and altogether you fire off such high-flown nonsense that
      your listener must have a great deal of love and ignorance of life to
      assent to it. Fortunately for men, women in love are always blinded by
      their feelings and never know anything of life. Far from not assenting,
      they actually turn pale with holy awe, are full of reverence and hang
      greedily on the maniac’s words. Sasha listened to me with attention,
      but I soon detected an absent-minded expression on her face, she did not
      understand me. The future of which I talked interested her only in its
      external aspect and I was wasting time in displaying my plans and projects
      before her. She was keenly interested in knowing which would be her room,
      what paper she would have in the room, why I had an upright piano instead
      of a grand piano, and so on. She examined carefully all the little things
      on my table, looked at the photographs, sniffed at the bottles, peeled the
      old stamps off the envelopes, saying she wanted them for something.
    

      “Please collect old stamps for me!” she said, making a grave
      face. “Please do.”
    

      Then she found a nut in the window, noisily cracked it and ate it.
    

      “Why don’t you stick little labels on the backs of your books?”
      she asked, taking a look at the bookcase.
    

      “What for?”
    

      “Oh, so that each book should have its number. And where am I to put
      my books? I’ve got books too, you know.”
    

      “What books have you got?” I asked.
    

      Sasha raised her eyebrows, thought a moment and said:
    

      “All sorts.”
    

      And if it had entered my head to ask her what thoughts, what convictions,
      what aims she had, she would no doubt have raised her eyebrows, thought a
      minute, and have said in the same way: “All sorts.”
    

      Later I saw Sasha home and left her house regularly, officially engaged,
      and was so reckoned till our wedding. If the reader will allow me to judge
      merely from my personal experience, I maintain that to be engaged is very
      dreary, far more so than to be a husband or nothing at all. An engaged man
      is neither one thing nor the other, he has left one side of the river and
      not reached the other, he is not married and yet he can’t be said to
      be a bachelor, but is in something not unlike the condition of the porter
      whom I have mentioned above.
    

      Every day as soon as I had a free moment I hastened to my fiancÃ©e. As I
      went I usually bore within me a multitude of hopes, desires, intentions,
      suggestions, phrases. I always fancied that as soon as the maid opened the
      door I should, from feeling oppressed and stifled, plunge at once up to my
      neck into a sea of refreshing happiness. But it always turned out
      otherwise in fact. Every time I went to see my fiancÃ©e I found all her
      family and other members of the household busy over the silly trousseau.
      (And by the way, they were hard at work sewing for two months and then
      they had less than a hundred roubles’ worth of things). There was a
      smell of irons, candle grease and fumes. Bugles scrunched under one’s
      feet. The two most important rooms were piled up with billows of linen,
      calico, and muslin and from among the billows peeped out Sasha’s
      little head with a thread between her teeth. All the sewing party welcomed
      me with cries of delight but at once led me off into the dining-room where
      I could not hinder them nor see what only husbands are permitted to
      behold. In spite of my feelings, I had to sit in the dining-room and
      converse with Pimenovna, one of the poor relations. Sasha, looking worried
      and excited, kept running by me with a thimble, a skein of wool or some
      other boring object.
    

      “Wait, wait, I shan’t be a minute,” she would say when I
      raised imploring eyes to her. “Only fancy that wretch Stepanida has
      spoilt the bodice of the barÃ¨ge dress!”
    

      And after waiting in vain for this grace, I lost my temper, went out of
      the house and walked about the streets in the company of the new cane I
      had bought. Or I would want to go for a walk or a drive with my fiancÃ©e,
      would go round and find her already standing in the hall with her mother,
      dressed to go out and playing with her parasol.
    

      “Oh, we are going to the Arcade,” she would say. “We
      have got to buy some more cashmere and change the hat.”
    

      My outing is knocked on the head. I join the ladies and go with them to
      the Arcade. It is revoltingly dull to listen to women shopping, haggling
      and trying to outdo the sharp shopman. I felt ashamed when Sasha, after
      turning over masses of material and knocking down the prices to a minimum,
      walked out of the shop without buying anything, or else told the shopman
      to cut her some half rouble’s worth.
    

      When they came out of the shop, Sasha and her mamma with scared and
      worried faces would discuss at length having made a mistake, having bought
      the wrong thing, the flowers in the chintz being too dark, and so on.
    

      Yes, it is a bore to be engaged! I’m glad it’s over.
    

      Now I am married. It is evening. I am sitting in my study reading. Behind
      me on the sofa Sasha is sitting munching something noisily. I want a glass
      of beer.
    

      “Sasha, look for the corkscrew. . . .” I say. “It’s
      lying about somewhere.”
    

      Sasha leaps up, rummages in a disorderly way among two or three heaps of
      papers, drops the matches, and without finding the corkscrew, sits down in
      silence. . . . Five minutes pass—ten. . . I begin to be fretted both
      by thirst and vexation.
    

      “Sasha, do look for the corkscrew,” I say.
    

      Sasha leaps up again and rummages among the papers near me. Her munching
      and rustling of the papers affects me like the sound of sharpening knives
      against each other. . . . I get up and begin looking for the corkscrew
      myself. At last it is found and the beer is uncorked. Sasha remains by the
      table and begins telling me something at great length.
    

      “You’d better read something, Sasha,” I say.
    

      She takes up a book, sits down facing me and begins moving her lips . . .
      . I look at her little forehead, moving lips, and sink into thought.
    

      “She is getting on for twenty. . . .” I reflect. “If one
      takes a boy of the educated class and of that age and compares them, what
      a difference! The boy would have knowledge and convictions and some
      intelligence.”
    

      But I forgive that difference just as the low forehead and moving lips are
      forgiven. I remember in my old Lovelace days I have cast off women for a
      stain on their stockings, or for one foolish word, or for not cleaning
      their teeth, and now I forgive everything: the munching, the muddling
      about after the corkscrew, the slovenliness, the long talking about
      nothing that matters; I forgive it all almost unconsciously, with no
      effort of will, as though Sasha’s mistakes were my mistakes, and
      many things which would have made me wince in old days move me to
      tenderness and even rapture. The explanation of this forgiveness of
      everything lies in my love for Sasha, but what is the explanation of the
      love itself, I really don’t know.
    











      LIGHTS
    

THE dog was barking
      excitedly outside. And Ananyev the engineer, his assistant called Von
      Schtenberg, and I went out of the hut to see at whom it was barking. I was
      the visitor, and might have remained indoors, but I must confess my head
      was a little dizzy from the wine I had drunk, and I was glad to get a
      breath of fresh air.
    

      “There is nobody here,” said Ananyev when we went out. “Why
      are you telling stories, Azorka? You fool!”
    

      There was not a soul in sight.
    

      “The fool,” Azorka, a black house-dog, probably conscious of
      his guilt in barking for nothing and anxious to propitiate us, approached
      us, diffidently wagging his tail. The engineer bent down and touched him
      between his ears.
    

      “Why are you barking for nothing, creature?” he said in the
      tone in which good-natured people talk to children and dogs. “Have
      you had a bad dream or what? Here, doctor, let me commend to your
      attention,” he said, turning to me, “a wonderfully nervous
      subject! Would you believe it, he can’t endure solitude—he is
      always having terrible dreams and suffering from nightmares; and when you
      shout at him he has something like an attack of hysterics.”
    

      “Yes, a dog of refined feelings,” the student chimed in.
    

      Azorka must have understood that the conversation was concerning him. He
      turned his head upwards and grinned plaintively, as though to say, “Yes,
      at times I suffer unbearably, but please excuse it!”
    

      It was an August night, there were stars, but it was dark. Owing to the
      fact that I had never in my life been in such exceptional surroundings, as
      I had chanced to come into now, the starry night seemed to me gloomy,
      inhospitable, and darker than it was in reality. I was on a railway line
      which was still in process of construction. The high, half-finished
      embankment, the mounds of sand, clay, and rubble, the holes, the
      wheel-barrows standing here and there, the flat tops of the mud huts in
      which the workmen lived—all this muddle, coloured to one tint by the
      darkness, gave the earth a strange, wild aspect that suggested the times
      of chaos. There was so little order in all that lay before me that it was
      somehow strange in the midst of the hideously excavated, grotesque-looking
      earth to see the silhouettes of human beings and the slender telegraph
      posts. Both spoiled the ensemble of the picture, and seemed to belong to a
      different world. It was still, and the only sound came from the telegraph
      wire droning its wearisome refrain somewhere very high above our heads.
    

      We climbed up on the embankment and from its height looked down upon the
      earth. A hundred yards away where the pits, holes, and mounds melted into
      the darkness of the night, a dim light was twinkling. Beyond it gleamed
      another light, beyond that a third, then a hundred paces away two red eyes
      glowed side by side—probably the windows of some hut—and a
      long series of such lights, growing continually closer and dimmer,
      stretched along the line to the very horizon, then turned in a semicircle
      to the left and disappeared in the darkness of the distance. The lights
      were motionless. There seemed to be something in common between them and
      the stillness of the night and the disconsolate song of the telegraph
      wire. It seemed as though some weighty secret were buried under the
      embankment and only the lights, the night, and the wires knew of it.
    

      “How glorious, O Lord!” sighed Ananyev; “such space and
      beauty that one can’t tear oneself away! And what an embankment! It’s
      not an embankment, my dear fellow, but a regular Mont Blanc. It’s
      costing millions. . . .”
    

      Going into ecstasies over the lights and the embankment that was costing
      millions, intoxicated by the wine and his sentimental mood, the engineer
      slapped Von Schtenberg on the shoulder and went on in a jocose tone:
    

      “Well, Mihail Mihailitch, lost in reveries? No doubt it is pleasant
      to look at the work of one’s own hands, eh? Last year this very spot
      was bare steppe, not a sight of human life, and now look: life . . .
      civilisation. . . And how splendid it all is, upon my soul! You and I are
      building a railway, and after we are gone, in another century or two, good
      men will build a factory, a school, a hospital, and things will begin to
      move! Eh!”
    

      The student stood motionless with his hands thrust in his pockets, and did
      not take his eyes off the lights. He was not listening to the engineer,
      but was thinking, and was apparently in the mood in which one does not
      want to speak or to listen. After a prolonged silence he turned to me and
      said quietly:
    

      “Do you know what those endless lights are like? They make me think
      of something long dead, that lived thousands of years ago, something like
      the camps of the Amalekites or the Philistines. It is as though some
      people of the Old Testament had pitched their camp and were waiting for
      morning to fight with Saul or David. All that is wanting to complete the
      illusion is the blare of trumpets and sentries calling to one another in
      some Ethiopian language.”
    

      And, as though of design, the wind fluttered over the line and brought a
      sound like the clank of weapons. A silence followed. I don’t know
      what the engineer and the student were thinking of, but it seemed to me
      already that I actually saw before me something long dead and even heard
      the sentry talking in an unknown tongue. My imagination hastened to
      picture the tents, the strange people, their clothes, their armour.
    

      “Yes,” muttered the student pensively, “once Philistines
      and Amalekites were living in this world, making wars, playing their part,
      and now no trace of them remains. So it will be with us. Now we are making
      a railway, are standing here philosophising, but two thousand years will
      pass—and of this embankment and of all those men, asleep after their
      hard work, not one grain of dust will remain. In reality, it’s
      awful!”
    

      “You must drop those thoughts . . .” said the engineer gravely
      and admonishingly.
    

      “Why?”
    

      “Because. . . . Thoughts like that are for the end of life, not for
      the beginning of it. You are too young for them.”
    

      “Why so?” repeated the student.
    

      “All these thoughts of the transitoriness, the insignificance and
      the aimlessness of life, of the inevitability of death, of the shadows of
      the grave, and so on, all such lofty thoughts, I tell you, my dear fellow,
      are good and natural in old age when they come as the product of years of
      inner travail, and are won by suffering and really are intellectual
      riches; for a youthful brain on the threshold of real life they are simply
      a calamity! A calamity!” Ananyev repeated with a wave of his hand.
      “To my mind it is better at your age to have no head on your
      shoulders at all than to think on these lines. I am speaking seriously,
      Baron. And I have been meaning to speak to you about it for a long time,
      for I noticed from the very first day of our acquaintance your partiality
      for these damnable ideas!”
    

      “Good gracious, why are they damnable?” the student asked with
      a smile, and from his voice and his face I could see that he asked the
      question from simple politeness, and that the discussion raised by the
      engineer did not interest him in the least.
    

      I could hardly keep my eyes open. I was dreaming that immediately after
      our walk we should wish each other good-night and go to bed, but my dream
      was not quickly realised. When we had returned to the hut the engineer put
      away the empty bottles and took out of a large wicker hamper two full
      ones, and uncorking them, sat down to his work-table with the evident
      intention of going on drinking, talking, and working. Sipping a little
      from his glass, he made pencil notes on some plans and went on pointing
      out to the student that the latter’s way of thinking was not what it
      should be. The student sat beside him checking accounts and saying
      nothing. He, like me, had no inclination to speak or to listen. That I
      might not interfere with their work, I sat away from the table on the
      engineer’s crooked-legged travelling bedstead, feeling bored and
      expecting every moment that they would suggest I should go to bed. It was
      going on for one o’clock.
    

      Having nothing to do, I watched my new acquaintances. I had never seen
      Ananyev or the student before. I had only made their acquaintance on the
      night I have described. Late in the evening I was returning on horseback
      from a fair to the house of a landowner with whom I was staying, had got
      on the wrong road in the dark and lost my way. Going round and round by
      the railway line and seeing how dark the night was becoming, I thought of
      the “barefoot railway roughs,” who lie in wait for travellers
      on foot and on horseback, was frightened, and knocked at the first hut I
      came to. There I was cordially received by Ananyev and the student. As is
      usually the case with strangers casually brought together, we quickly
      became acquainted, grew friendly and at first over the tea and afterward
      over the wine, began to feel as though we had known each other for years.
      At the end of an hour or so, I knew who they were and how fate had brought
      them from town to the far-away steppe; and they knew who I was, what my
      occupation and my way of thinking.
    

      Nikolay Anastasyevitch Ananyev, the engineer, was a broad-shouldered,
      thick-set man, and, judging from his appearance, he had, like Othello,
      begun the “descent into the vale of years,” and was growing
      rather too stout. He was just at that stage which old match-making women
      mean when they speak of “a man in the prime of his age,” that
      is, he was neither young nor old, was fond of good fare, good liquor, and
      praising the past, panted a little as he walked, snored loudly when he was
      asleep, and in his manner with those surrounding him displayed that calm
      imperturbable good humour which is always acquired by decent people by the
      time they have reached the grade of a staff officer and begun to grow
      stout. His hair and beard were far from being grey, but already, with a
      condescension of which he was unconscious, he addressed young men as
      “my dear boy” and felt himself entitled to lecture them
      good-humouredly about their way of thinking. His movements and his voice
      were calm, smooth, and self-confident, as they are in a man who is
      thoroughly well aware that he has got his feet firmly planted on the right
      road, that he has definite work, a secure living, a settled outlook. . . .
      His sunburnt, thick-nosed face and muscular neck seemed to say: “I am
      well fed, healthy, satisfied with myself, and the time will come when you
      young people too, will be well-fed, healthy, and satisfied with
      yourselves. . . .” He was dressed in a cotton shirt with the collar
      awry and in full linen trousers thrust into his high boots. From certain
      trifles, as for instance, from his coloured worsted girdle, his
      embroidered collar, and the patch on his elbow, I was able to guess that
      he was married and in all probability tenderly loved by his wife.
    

      Baron Von Schtenberg, a student of the Institute of Transport, was a young
      man of about three or four and twenty. Only his fair hair and scanty
      beard, and, perhaps, a certain coarseness and frigidity in his features
      showed traces of his descent from Barons of the Baltic provinces;
      everything else—his name, Mihail Mihailovitch, his religion, his
      ideas, his manners, and the expression of his face were purely Russian.
      Wearing, like Ananyev, a cotton shirt and high boots, with his round
      shoulders, his hair left uncut, and his sunburnt face, he did not look
      like a student or a Baron, but like an ordinary Russian workman. His words
      and gestures were few, he drank reluctantly without relish, checked the
      accounts mechanically, and seemed all the while to be thinking of
      something else. His movements and voice were calm, and smooth too, but his
      calmness was of a different kind from the engineer’s. His sunburnt,
      slightly ironical, dreamy face, his eyes which looked up from under his
      brows, and his whole figure were expressive of spiritual stagnatio—mental
      sloth. He looked as though it did not matter to him in the least whether
      the light were burning before him or not, whether the wine were nice or
      nasty, and whether the accounts he was checking were correct or not. . . .
      And on his intelligent, calm face I read: “I don’t see so far
      any good in definite work, a secure living, and a settled outlook. It’s
      all nonsense. I was in Petersburg, now I am sitting here in this hut, in
      the autumn I shall go back to Petersburg, then in the spring here again. .
      . . What sense there is in all that I don’t know, and no one knows.
      . . . And so it’s no use talking about it. . . .”
    

      He listened to the engineer without interest, with the condescending
      indifference with which cadets in the senior classes listen to an effusive
      and good-natured old attendant. It seemed as though there were nothing new
      to him in what the engineer said, and that if he had not himself been too
      lazy to talk, he would have said something newer and cleverer. Meanwhile
      Ananyev would not desist. He had by now laid aside his good-humoured,
      jocose tone and spoke seriously, even with a fervour which was quite out
      of keeping with his expression of calmness. Apparently he had no distaste
      for abstract subjects, was fond of them, indeed, but had neither skill nor
      practice in the handling of them. And this lack of practice was so
      pronounced in his talk that I did not always grasp his meaning at once.
    

      “I hate those ideas with all my heart!” he said, “I was
      infected by them myself in my youth, I have not quite got rid of them even
      now, and I tell you—perhaps because I am stupid and such thoughts
      were not the right food for my mind—they did me nothing but harm.
      That’s easy to understand! Thoughts of the aimlessness of life, of
      the insignificance and transitoriness of the visible world, Solomon’s
      'vanity of vanities’ have been, and are to this day, the highest and
      final stage in the realm of thought. The thinker reaches that stage and—comes
      to a halt! There is nowhere further to go. The activity of the normal
      brain is completed with this, and that is natural and in the order of
      things. Our misfortune is that we begin thinking at that end. What normal
      people end with we begin with. From the first start, as soon as the brain
      begins working independently, we mount to the very topmost, final step and
      refuse to know anything about the steps below.”
    

      “What harm is there in that?” said the student.
    

      “But you must understand that it’s abnormal,” shouted
      Ananyev, looking at him almost wrathfully. “If we find means of
      mounting to the topmost step without the help of the lower ones, then the
      whole long ladder, that is the whole of life, with its colours, sounds,
      and thoughts, loses all meaning for us. That at your age such reflections
      are harmful and absurd, you can see from every step of your rational
      independent life. Let us suppose you sit down this minute to read Darwin
      or Shakespeare, you have scarcely read a page before the poison shows
      itself; and your long life, and Shakespeare, and Darwin, seem to you
      nonsense, absurdity, because you know you will die, that Shakespeare and
      Darwin have died too, that their thoughts have not saved them, nor the
      earth, nor you, and that if life is deprived of meaning in that way, all
      science, poetry, and exalted thoughts seem only useless diversions, the
      idle playthings of grown up people; and you leave off reading at the
      second page. Now, let us suppose that people come to you as an intelligent
      man and ask your opinion about war, for instance: whether it is desirable,
      whether it is morally justifiable or not. In answer to that terrible
      question you merely shrug your shoulders and confine yourself to some
      commonplace, because for you, with your way of thinking, it makes
      absolutely no difference whether hundreds of thousands of people die a
      violent death, or a natural one: the results are the same—ashes and
      oblivion. You and I are building a railway line. What’s the use, one
      may ask, of our worrying our heads, inventing, rising above the hackneyed
      thing, feeling for the workmen, stealing or not stealing, when we know
      that this railway line will turn to dust within two thousand years, and so
      on, and so on. . . . You must admit that with such a disastrous way of
      looking at things there can be no progress, no science, no art, nor even
      thought itself. We fancy that we are cleverer than the crowd, and than
      Shakespeare. In reality our thinking leads to nothing because we have no
      inclination to go down to the lower steps and there is nowhere higher to
      go, so our brain stands at the freezing point—neither up nor down; I
      was in bondage to these ideas for six years, and by all that is holy, I
      never read a sensible book all that time, did not gain a ha’porth of
      wisdom, and did not raise my moral standard an inch. Was not that
      disastrous? Moreover, besides being corrupted ourselves, we bring poison
      into the lives of those surrounding us. It would be all right if, with our
      pessimism, we renounced life, went to live in a cave, or made haste to
      die, but, as it is, in obedience to the universal law, we live, feel, love
      women, bring up children, construct railways!”
    

      “Our thoughts make no one hot or cold,” the student said
      reluctantly.
    

      “Ah! there you are again!—do stop it! You have not yet had a
      good sniff at life. But when you have lived as long as I have you will
      know a thing or two! Our theory of life is not so innocent as you suppose.
      In practical life, in contact with human beings, it leads to nothing but
      horrors and follies. It has been my lot to pass through experiences which
      I would not wish a wicked Tatar to endure.”
    

      “For instance?” I asked.
    

      “For instance?” repeated the engineer.
    

      He thought a minute, smiled and said:
    

      “For instance, take this example. More correctly, it is not an
      example, but a regular drama, with a plot and a dÃ©nouement. An excellent
      lesson! Ah, what a lesson!”
    

      He poured out wine for himself and us, emptied his glass, stroked his
      broad chest with his open hands, and went on, addressing himself more to
      me than to the student.
    

      “It was in the year 187—, soon after the war, and when I had
      just left the University. I was going to the Caucasus, and on the way
      stopped for five days in the seaside town of N. I must tell you that I was
      born and grew up in that town, and so there is nothing odd in my thinking
      N. extraordinarily snug, cosy, and beautiful, though for a man from
      Petersburg or Moscow, life in it would be as dreary and comfortless as in
      any Tchuhloma or Kashira. With melancholy I passed by the high school
      where I had been a pupil; with melancholy I walked about the very familiar
      park, I made a melancholy attempt to get a nearer look at people I had not
      seen for a long time—all with the same melancholy.
    

      “Among other things, I drove out one evening to the so-called
      Quarantine. It was a small mangy copse in which, at some forgotten time of
      plague, there really had been a quarantine station, and which was now the
      resort of summer visitors. It was a drive of three miles from the town
      along a good soft road. As one drove along one saw on the left the blue
      sea, on the right the unending gloomy steppe; there was plenty of air to
      breathe, and wide views for the eyes to rest on. The copse itself lay on
      the seashore. Dismissing my cabman, I went in at the familiar gates and
      first turned along an avenue leading to a little stone summer-house which
      I had been fond of in my childhood. In my opinion that round, heavy
      summer-house on its clumsy columns, which combined the romantic charm of
      an old tomb with the ungainliness of a Sobakevitch,* was the most poetical
      nook in the whole town. It stood at the edge above the cliff, and from it
      there was a splendid view of the sea.
    

      *A character in Gogol’s Dead Souls.—Translator’s
      Note.


      “I sat down on the seat, and, bending over the parapet, looked down.
      A path ran from the summer-house along the steep, almost overhanging
      cliff, between the lumps of clay and tussocks of burdock. Where it ended,
      far below on the sandy shore, low waves were languidly foaming and softly
      purring. The sea was as majestic, as infinite, and as forbidding as seven
      years before when I left the high school and went from my native town to
      the capital; in the distance there was a dark streak of smoke—a
      steamer was passing—and except for this hardly visible and
      motionless streak and the sea-swallows that flitted over the water, there
      was nothing to give life to the monotonous view of sea and sky. To right
      and left of the summer-house stretched uneven clay cliffs.
    

      “You know that when a man in a melancholy mood is left tÃªte-Ã -tÃªte
      with the sea, or any landscape which seems to him grandiose, there is
      always, for some reason, mixed with melancholy, a conviction that he will
      live and die in obscurity, and he reflectively snatches up a pencil and
      hastens to write his name on the first thing that comes handy. And that, I
      suppose, is why all convenient solitary nooks like my summer-house are
      always scrawled over in pencil or carved with penknives. I remember as
      though it were to-day; looking at the parapet I read: ‘Ivan
      Korolkov, May 16, 1876.’ Beside Korolkov some local dreamer had
      scribbled freely, adding:
    

        “‘He stood on the desolate ocean’s strand,
           While his soul was filled with imaginings grand.’


      And his handwriting was dreamy, limp like wet silk. An individual called
      Kross, probably an insignificant, little man, felt his unimportance so
      deeply that he gave full licence to his penknife and carved his name in
      deep letters an inch high. I took a pencil out of my pocket mechanically,
      and I too scribbled on one of the columns. All that is irrelevant,
      however. . . You must forgive me—I don’t know how to tell a
      story briefly.
    

      “I was sad and a little bored. Boredom, the stillness, and the
      purring of the sea gradually brought me to the line of thought we have
      been discussing. At that period, towards the end of the 'seventies, it had
      begun to be fashionable with the public, and later, at the beginning of
      the ‘eighties, it gradually passed from the general public into
      literature, science, and politics. I was no more than twenty-six at the
      time, but I knew perfectly well that life was aimless and had no meaning,
      that everything was a deception and an illusion, that in its essential
      nature and results a life of penal servitude in Sahalin was not in any way
      different from a life spent in Nice, that the difference between the brain
      of a Kant and the brain of a fly was of no real significance, that no one
      in this world is righteous or guilty, that everything was stuff and
      nonsense and damn it all! I lived as though I were doing a favour to some
      unseen power which compelled me to live, and to which I seemed to say:
      ‘Look, I don’t care a straw for life, but I am living!’
      I thought on one definite line, but in all sorts of keys, and in that
      respect I was like the subtle gourmand who could prepare a hundred
      appetising dishes from nothing but potatoes. There is no doubt that I was
      one-sided and even to some extent narrow, but I fancied at the time that
      my intellectual horizon had neither beginning nor end, and that my thought
      was as boundless as the sea. Well, as far as I can judge by myself, the
      philosophy of which we are speaking has something alluring, narcotic in
      its nature, like tobacco or morphia. It becomes a habit, a craving. You
      take advantage of every minute of solitude to gloat over thoughts of the
      aimlessness of life and the darkness of the grave. While I was sitting in
      the summer-house, Greek children with long noses were decorously walking
      about the avenues. I took advantage of the occasion and, looking at them,
      began reflecting in this style:
    

      “‘Why are these children born, and what are they living for?
      Is there any sort of meaning in their existence? They grow up, without
      themselves knowing what for; they will live in this God-forsaken,
      comfortless hole for no sort of reason, and then they will die. . . .’
    

      “And I actually felt vexed with those children because they were
      walking about decorously and talking with dignity, as though they did not
      hold their little colourless lives so cheap and knew what they were living
      for. . . . I remember that far away at the end of an avenue three feminine
      figures came into sight. Three young ladies, one in a pink dress, two in
      white, were walking arm-in-arm, talking and laughing. Looking after them,
      I thought:
    

      “‘It wouldn’t be bad to have an affair with some woman
      for a couple of days in this dull place.’
    

      “I recalled by the way that it was three weeks since I had visited
      my Petersburg lady, and thought that a passing love affair would come in
      very appropriately for me just now. The young lady in white in the middle
      was rather younger and better looking than her companions, and judging by
      her manners and her laugh, she was a high-school girl in an upper form. I
      looked, not without impure thoughts, at her bust, and at the same time
      reflected about her: 'She will be trained in music and manners, she will
      be married to some Greek—God help us!—will lead a grey,
      stupid, comfortless life, will bring into the world a crowd of children
      without knowing why, and then will die. An absurd life!’
    

      “I must say that as a rule I was a great hand at combining my lofty
      ideas with the lowest prose.
    

      “Thoughts of the darkness of the grave did not prevent me from
      giving busts and legs their full due. Our dear Baron’s exalted ideas
      do not prevent him from going on Saturdays to Vukolovka on amatory
      expeditions. To tell the honest truth, as far as I remember, my attitude
      to women was most insulting. Now, when I think of that high-school girl, I
      blush for my thoughts then, but at the time my conscience was perfectly
      untroubled. I, the son of honourable parents, a Christian, who had
      received a superior education, not naturally wicked or stupid, felt not
      the slightest uneasiness when I paid women Blutgeld, as the Germans
      call it, or when I followed high-school girls with insulting looks. . . .
      The trouble is that youth makes its demands, and our philosophy has
      nothing in principle against those demands, whether they are good or
      whether they are loathsome. One who knows that life is aimless and death
      inevitable is not interested in the struggle against nature or the
      conception of sin: whether you struggle or whether you don’t, you
      will die and rot just the same. . . . Secondly, my friends, our philosophy
      instils even into very young people what is called reasonableness. The
      predominance of reason over the heart is simply overwhelming amongst us.
      Direct feeling, inspiration—everything is choked by petty analysis.
      Where there is reasonableness there is coldness, and cold people—it’s
      no use to disguise it—know nothing of chastity. That virtue is only
      known to those who are warm, affectionate, and capable of love. Thirdly,
      our philosophy denies the significance of each individual personality. It’s
      easy to see that if I deny the personality of some Natalya Stepanovna, it’s
      absolutely nothing to me whether she is insulted or not. To-day one
      insults her dignity as a human being and pays her Blutgeld, and
      next day thinks no more of her.
    

      “So I sat in the summer-house and watched the young ladies. Another
      woman’s figure appeared in the avenue, with fair hair, her head
      uncovered and a white knitted shawl on her shoulders. She walked along the
      avenue, then came into the summer-house, and taking hold of the parapet,
      looked indifferently below and into the distance over the sea. As she came
      in she paid no attention to me, as though she did not notice me. I
      scrutinised her from foot to head (not from head to foot, as one
      scrutinises men) and found that she was young, not more than
      five-and-twenty, nice-looking, with a good figure, in all probability
      married and belonging to the class of respectable women. She was dressed
      as though she were at home, but fashionably and with taste, as ladies are,
      as a rule, in N.
    

      “‘This one would do nicely,’ I thought, looking at her
      handsome figure and her arms; ‘she is all right. . . . She is
      probably the wife of some doctor or schoolmaster. . . .’
    

      “But to make up to her—that is, to make her the heroine of one
      of those impromptu affairs to which tourists are so prone—was not
      easy and, indeed, hardly possible. I felt that as I gazed at her face. The
      way she looked, and the expression of her face, suggested that the sea,
      the smoke in the distance, and the sky had bored her long, long ago, and
      wearied her sight. She seemed to be tired, bored, and thinking about
      something dreary, and her face had not even that fussy, affectedly
      indifferent expression which one sees in the face of almost every woman
      when she is conscious of the presence of an unknown man in her vicinity.
    

      “The fair-haired lady took a bored and passing glance at me, sat
      down on a seat and sank into reverie, and from her face I saw that she had
      no thoughts for me, and that I, with my Petersburg appearance, did not
      arouse in her even simple curiosity. But yet I made up my mind to speak to
      her, and asked: ‘Madam, allow me to ask you at what time do the
      waggonettes go from here to the town?’
    

      “‘At ten or eleven, I believe. . . .’”
    

      “I thanked her. She glanced at me once or twice, and suddenly there
      was a gleam of curiosity, then of something like wonder on her passionless
      face. . . . I made haste to assume an indifferent expression and to fall
      into a suitable attitude; she was catching on! She suddenly jumped up from
      the seat, as though something had bitten her, and examining me hurriedly,
      with a gentle smile, asked timidly:
    

      “‘Oh, aren’t you Ananyev?’
    

      “‘Yes, I am Ananyev,’ I answered.
    

      “‘And don’t you recognise me? No?’
    

      “I was a little confused. I looked intently at her, and—would
      you believe it?—I recognised her not from her face nor her figure,
      but from her gentle, weary smile. It was Natalya Stepanovna, or, as she
      was called, Kisotchka, the very girl I had been head over ears in love
      with seven or eight years before, when I was wearing the uniform of a
      high-school boy. The doings of far, vanished days, the days of long ago. .
      . . I remember this Kisotchka, a thin little high-school girl of fifteen
      or sixteen, when she was something just for a schoolboy’s taste,
      created by nature especially for Platonic love. What a charming little
      girl she was! Pale, fragile, light—she looked as though a breath
      would send her flying like a feather to the skies—a gentle,
      perplexed face, little hands, soft long hair to her belt, a waist as thin
      as a wasp’s—altogether something ethereal, transparent like
      moonlight—in fact, from the point of view of a high-school boy a
      peerless beauty. . . . Wasn’t I in love with her! I did not sleep at
      night. I wrote verses. . . . Sometimes in the evenings she would sit on a
      seat in the park while we schoolboys crowded round her, gazing reverently;
      in response to our compliments, our sighing, and attitudinising, she would
      shrink nervously from the evening damp, screw up her eyes, and smile
      gently, and at such times she was awfully like a pretty little kitten. As
      we gazed at her every one of us had a desire to caress her and stroke her
      like a cat, hence her nickname of Kisotchka.
    

      “In the course of the seven or eight years since we had met,
      Kisotchka had greatly changed. She had grown more robust and stouter, and
      had quite lost the resemblance to a soft, fluffy kitten. It was not that
      her features looked old or faded, but they had somehow lost their
      brilliance and looked sterner, her hair seemed shorter, she looked taller,
      and her shoulders were quite twice as broad, and what was most striking,
      there was already in her face the expression of motherliness and
      resignation commonly seen in respectable women of her age, and this, of
      course, I had never seen in her before. . . . In short, of the
      school-girlish and the Platonic her face had kept the gentle smile and
      nothing more. . . .
    

      “We got into conversation. Learning that I was already an engineer,
      Kisotchka was immensely delighted.
    

      “‘How good that is!’ she said, looking joyfully into my
      face. ‘Ah, how good! And how splendid you all are! Of all who left
      with you, not one has been a failure—they have all turned out well.
      One an engineer, another a doctor, a third a teacher, another, they say,
      is a celebrated singer in Petersburg. . . . You are all splendid, all of
      you. . . . Ah, how good that is!’
    

      “Kisotchka’s eyes shone with genuine goodwill and gladness.
      She was admiring me like an elder sister or a former governess. ‘While
      I looked at her sweet face and thought, It wouldn’t be bad to get
      hold of her to-day!’
    

      “‘Do you remember, Natalya Stepanovna,’ I asked her,
      ‘how I once brought you in the park a bouquet with a note in it? You
      read my note, and such a look of bewilderment came into your face. . . .’
    

      “‘No, I don’t remember that,’ she said, laughing.
      ‘But I remember how you wanted to challenge Florens to a duel over
      me. . . .’
    

      “‘Well, would you believe it, I don’t remember that. . .
      .’
    

      “‘Well, that’s all over and done with . . .’
      sighed Kisotchka. ‘At one time I was your idol, and now it is my
      turn to look up to all of you. . . .’
    

      “From further conversation I learned that two years after leaving
      the high school, Kisotchka had been married to a resident in the town who
      was half Greek, half Russian, had a post either in the bank or in the
      insurance society, and also carried on a trade in corn. He had a strange
      surname, something in the style of Populaki or Skarandopulo. . . .
      Goodness only knows—I have forgotten. . . . As a matter of fact,
      Kisotchka spoke little and with reluctance about herself. The conversation
      was only about me. She asked me about the College of Engineering, about my
      comrades, about Petersburg, about my plans, and everything I said moved
      her to eager delight and exclamations of, ‘Oh, how good that is!’
    

      “We went down to the sea and walked over the sands; then when the
      night air began to blow chill and damp from the sea we climbed up again.
      All the while our talk was of me and of the past. We walked about until
      the reflection of the sunset had died away from the windows of the summer
      villas.
    

      “‘Come in and have some tea,’ Kisotchka suggested.
      ‘The samovar must have been on the table long ago. . . . I am alone
      at home,’ she said, as her villa came into sight through the green
      of the acacias. ‘My husband is always in the town and only comes
      home at night, and not always then, and I must own that I am so dull that
      it’s simply deadly.’
    

      “I followed her in, admiring her back and shoulders. I was glad that
      she was married. Married women are better material for temporary love
      affairs than girls. I was also pleased that her husband was not at home.
      At the same time I felt that the affair would not come off. . . .
    

      “We went into the house. The rooms were smallish and had low
      ceilings, and the furniture was typical of the summer villa (Russians like
      having at their summer villas uncomfortable heavy, dingy furniture which
      they are sorry to throw away and have nowhere to put), but from certain
      details I could observe that Kisotchka and her husband were not badly off,
      and must be spending five or six thousand roubles a year. I remember that
      in the middle of the room which Kisotchka called the dining-room there was
      a round table, supported for some reason on six legs, and on it a samovar
      and cups. At the edge of the table lay an open book, a pencil, and an
      exercise book. I glanced at the book and recognised it as ‘Malinin
      and Burenin’s Arithmetical Examples.’ It was open, as I now
      remember, at the ‘Rules of Compound Interest.’
    

      “‘To whom are you giving lessons?’ I asked Kisotchka.
    

      “‘Nobody,’ she answered. ‘I am just doing some. .
      . . I have nothing to do, and am so bored that I think of the old days and
      do sums.’
    

      “‘Have you any children?’
    

      “‘I had a baby boy, but he only lived a week.’
    

      “We began drinking tea. Admiring me, Kisotchka said again how good
      it was that I was an engineer, and how glad she was of my success. And the
      more she talked and the more genuinely she smiled, the stronger was my
      conviction that I should go away without having gained my object. I was a
      connoisseur in love affairs in those days, and could accurately gauge my
      chances of success. You can boldly reckon on success if you are tracking
      down a fool or a woman as much on the look out for new experiences and
      sensations as yourself, or an adventuress to whom you are a stranger. If
      you come across a sensible and serious woman, whose face has an expression
      of weary submission and goodwill, who is genuinely delighted at your
      presence, and, above all, respects you, you may as well turn back. To
      succeed in that case needs longer than one day.
    

      “And by evening light Kisotchka seemed even more charming than by
      day. She attracted me more and more, and apparently she liked me too, and
      the surroundings were most appropriate: the husband not at home, no
      servants visible, stillness around. . . . Though I had little confidence
      in success, I made up my mind to begin the attack anyway. First of all it
      was necessary to get into a familiar tone and to change Kisotchka’s
      lyrically earnest mood into a more frivolous one.
    

      “‘Let us change the conversation, Natalya Stepanovna,’ I
      began. 'Let us talk of something amusing. First of all, allow me, for the
      sake of old times, to call you Kisotchka.’
    

      “She allowed me.
    

      “‘Tell me, please, Kisotchka,’ I went on, ‘what is
      the matter with all the fair sex here. What has happened to them? In old
      days they were all so moral and virtuous, and now, upon my word, if one
      asks about anyone, one is told such things that one is quite shocked at
      human nature. . . . One young lady has eloped with an officer; another has
      run away and carried off a high-school boy with her; another—a
      married woman—has run away from her husband with an actor; a fourth
      has left her husband and gone off with an officer, and so on and so on. It’s
      a regular epidemic! If it goes on like this there won’t be a girl or
      a young woman left in your town!’
    

      “I spoke in a vulgar, playful tone. If Kisotchka had laughed in
      response I should have gone on in this style: ‘You had better look
      out, Kisotchka, or some officer or actor will be carrying you off!’
      She would have dropped her eyes and said: ‘As though anyone would
      care to carry me off; there are plenty younger and better looking . . . .’
      And I should have said: ‘Nonsense, Kisotchka—I for one should
      be delighted!’ And so on in that style, and it would all have gone
      swimmingly. But Kisotchka did not laugh in response; on the contrary, she
      looked grave and sighed.
    

      “‘All you have been told is true,’ she said. ‘My
      cousin Sonya ran away from her husband with an actor. Of course, it is
      wrong. . . . Everyone ought to bear the lot that fate has laid on him, but
      I do not condemn them or blame them. . . . Circumstances are sometimes too
      strong for anyone!’
    

      “‘That is so, Kisotchka, but what circumstances can produce a
      regular epidemic?’
    

      “‘It’s very simple and easy to understand,’
      replied Kisotchka, raising her eyebrows. ‘There is absolutely
      nothing for us educated girls and women to do with ourselves. Not everyone
      is able to go to the University, to become a teacher, to live for ideas,
      in fact, as men do. They have to be married. . . . And whom would you have
      them marry? You boys leave the high-school and go away to the University,
      never to return to your native town again, and you marry in Petersburg or
      Moscow, while the girls remain. . . . To whom are they to be married? Why,
      in the absence of decent cultured men, goodness knows what sort of men
      they marry—stockbrokers and such people of all kinds, who can do
      nothing but drink and get into rows at the club. . . . A girl married like
      that, at random. . . . And what is her life like afterwards? You can
      understand: a well-educated, cultured woman is living with a stupid,
      boorish man; if she meets a cultivated man, an officer, an actor, or a
      doctor—well, she gets to love him, her life becomes unbearable to
      her, and she runs away from her husband. And one can’t condemn her!’
    

      “‘If that is so, Kisotchka, why get married?’ I asked.
    

      “‘Yes, of course,’ said Kisotchka with a sigh, ‘but
      you know every girl fancies that any husband is better than nothing. . . .
      Altogether life is horrid here, Nikolay Anastasyevitch, very horrid! Life
      is stifling for a girl and stifling when one is married. . . . Here they
      laugh at Sonya for having run away from her husband, but if they could see
      into her soul they would not laugh. . . .’”
    

      Azorka began barking outside again. He growled angrily at some one, then
      howled miserably and dashed with all his force against the wall of the
      hut. . . . Ananyev’s face was puckered with pity; he broke off his
      story and went out. For two minutes he could be heard outside comforting
      his dog. “Good dog! poor dog!”
    

      “Our Nikolay Anastasyevitch is fond of talking,” said Von
      Schtenberg, laughing. “He is a good fellow,” he added after a
      brief silence.
    

      Returning to the hut, the engineer filled up our glasses and, smiling and
      stroking his chest, went on:
    

      “And so my attack was unsuccessful. There was nothing for it, I put
      off my unclean thoughts to a more favourable occasion, resigned myself to
      my failure and, as the saying is, waved my hand. What is more, under the
      influence of Kisotchka’s voice, the evening air, and the stillness,
      I gradually myself fell into a quiet sentimental mood. I remember I sat in
      an easy chair by the wide-open window and glanced at the trees and
      darkened sky. The outlines of the acacias and the lime trees were just the
      same as they had been eight years before; just as then, in the days of my
      childhood, somewhere far away there was the tinkling of a wretched piano,
      and the public had just the same habit of sauntering to and fro along the
      avenues, but the people were not the same. Along the avenues there walked
      now not my comrades and I and the object of my adoration, but schoolboys
      and young ladies who were strangers. And I felt melancholy. When to my
      inquiries about acquaintances I five times received from Kisotchka the
      answer, ‘He is dead,’ my melancholy changed into the feeling
      one has at the funeral service of a good man. And sitting there at the
      window, looking at the promenading public and listening to the tinkling
      piano, I saw with my own eyes for the first time in my life with what
      eagerness one generation hastens to replace another, and what a momentous
      significance even some seven or eight years may have in a man’s
      life!
    

      “Kisotchka put a bottle of red wine on the table. I drank it off,
      grew sentimental, and began telling a long story about something or other.
      Kisotchka listened as before, admiring me and my cleverness. And time
      passed. The sky was by now so dark that the outlines of the acacias and
      lime trees melted into one, the public was no longer walking up and down
      the avenues, the piano was silent and the only sound was the even murmur
      of the sea.
    

      “Young people are all alike. Be friendly to a young man, make much
      of him, regale him with wine, let him understand that he is attractive and
      he will sit on and on, forget that it is time to go, and talk and talk and
      talk. . . . His hosts cannot keep their eyes open, it’s past their
      bedtime, and he still stays and talks. That was what I did. Once I chanced
      to look at the clock; it was half-past ten. I began saying good-bye.
    

      “‘Have another glass before your walk,’ said Kisotchka.
    

      “I took another glass, again I began talking at length, forgot it
      was time to go, and sat down. Then there came the sound of men’s
      voices, footsteps and the clank of spurs.
    

      “‘I think my husband has come in . . . .’ said Kisotchka
      listening.
    

      “The door creaked, two voices came now from the passage and I saw
      two men pass the door that led into the dining-room: one a stout, solid,
      dark man with a hooked nose, wearing a straw hat, and the other a young
      officer in a white tunic. As they passed the door they both glanced
      casually and indifferently at Kisotchka and me, and I fancied both of them
      were drunk.
    

      “‘She told you a lie then, and you believed her!’ we
      heard a loud voice with a marked nasal twang say a minute later. ‘To
      begin with, it wasn’t at the big club but at the little one.’
    

      “‘You are angry, Jupiter, so you are wrong . . . .’ said
      another voice, obviously the officer’s, laughing and coughing.
      ‘I say, can I stay the night? Tell me honestly, shall I be in your
      way?’
    

      “‘What a question! Not only you can, but you must. What will
      you have, beer or wine?’
    

      “They were sitting two rooms away from us, talking loudly, and
      apparently feeling no interest in Kisotchka or her visitor. A perceptible
      change came over Kisotchka on her husband’s arrival. At first she
      flushed red, then her face wore a timid, guilty expression; she seemed to
      be troubled by some anxiety, and I began to fancy that she was ashamed to
      show me her husband and wanted me to go.
    

      “I began taking leave. Kisotchka saw me to the front door. I
      remember well her gentle mournful smile and kind patient eyes as she
      pressed my hand and said:
    

      “‘Most likely we shall never see each other again. Well, God
      give you every blessing. Thank you!’
    

      “Not one sigh, not one fine phrase. As she said good-bye she was
      holding the candle in her hand; patches of light danced over her face and
      neck, as though chasing her mournful smile. I pictured to myself the old
      Kisotchka whom one used to want to stroke like a cat, I looked intently at
      the present Kisotchka, and for some reason recalled her words: ‘Everyone
      ought to bear the lot that fate has laid on him.’ And I had a pang
      at my heart. I instinctively guessed how it was, and my conscience
      whispered to me that I, in my happiness and indifference, was face to face
      with a good, warm-hearted, loving creature, who was broken by suffering.
    

      “I said good-bye and went to the gate. By now it was quite dark. In
      the south the evenings draw in early in July and it gets dark rapidly.
      Towards ten o’clock it is so dark that you can’t see an inch
      before your nose. I lighted a couple of dozen matches before, almost
      groping, I found my way to the gate.
    

      “‘Cab!’ I shouted, going out of the gate; not a sound,
      not a sigh in answer. . . . ‘Cab,’ I repeated, ‘hey,
      Cab!’
    

      “But there was no cab of any description. The silence of the grave.
      I could hear nothing but the murmur of the drowsy sea and the beating of
      my heart from the wine. Lifting my eyes to the sky I found not a single
      star. It was dark and sullen. Evidently the sky was covered with clouds.
      For some reason I shrugged my shoulders, smiling foolishly, and once more,
      not quite so resolutely, shouted for a cab.
    

      “The echo answered me. A walk of three miles across open country and
      in the pitch dark was not an agreeable prospect. Before making up my mind
      to walk, I spent a long time deliberating and shouting for a cab; then,
      shrugging my shoulders, I walked lazily back to the copse, with no
      definite object in my mind. It was dreadfully dark in the copse. Here and
      there between the trees the windows of the summer villas glowed a dull
      red. A raven, disturbed by my steps and the matches with which I lighted
      my way to the summer-house, flew from tree to tree and rustled among the
      leaves. I felt vexed and ashamed, and the raven seemed to understand this,
      and croaked 'krrra!’ I was vexed that I had to walk, and ashamed
      that I had stayed on at Kisotchka’s, chatting like a boy.
    

      “I made my way to the summer-house, felt for the seat and sat down.
      Far below me, behind a veil of thick darkness, the sea kept up a low angry
      growl. I remember that, as though I were blind, I could see neither sky
      nor sea, nor even the summer-house in which I was sitting. And it seemed
      to me as though the whole world consisted only of the thoughts that were
      straying through my head, dizzy from the wine, and of an unseen power
      murmuring monotonously somewhere below. And afterwards, as I sank into a
      doze, it began to seem that it was not the sea murmuring, but my thoughts,
      and that the whole world consisted of nothing but me. And concentrating
      the whole world in myself in this way, I thought no more of cabs, of the
      town, and of Kisotchka, and abandoned myself to the sensation I was so
      fond of: that is, the sensation of fearful isolation when you feel that in
      the whole universe, dark and formless, you alone exist. It is a proud,
      demoniac sensation, only possible to Russians whose thoughts and
      sensations are as large, boundless, and gloomy as their plains, their
      forests, and their snow. If I had been an artist I should certainly have
      depicted the expression of a Russian’s face when he sits motionless
      and, with his legs under him and his head clasped in his hands, abandons
      himself to this sensation. . . . And together with this sensation come
      thoughts of the aimlessness of life, of death, and of the darkness of the
      grave. . . . The thoughts are not worth a brass farthing, but the
      expression of face must be fine. . . .
    

      “While I was sitting and dozing, unable to bring myself to get up—I
      was warm and comfortable—all at once, against the even monotonous
      murmur of the sea, as though upon a canvas, sounds began to grow distinct
      which drew my attention from myself. . . . Someone was coming hurriedly
      along the avenue. Reaching the summer-house this someone stopped, gave a
      sob like a little girl, and said in the voice of a weeping child: ‘My
      God, when will it all end! Merciful Heavens!’
    

      “Judging from the voice and the weeping I took it to be a little
      girl of ten or twelve. She walked irresolutely into the summer-house, sat
      down, and began half-praying, half-complaining aloud. . . .
    

      “‘Merciful God!’ she said, crying, ‘it’s
      unbearable. It’s beyond all endurance! I suffer in silence, but I
      want to live too. . . . Oh, my God! My God!’
    

      “And so on in the same style.
    

      “I wanted to look at the child and speak to her. So as not to
      frighten her I first gave a loud sigh and coughed, then cautiously struck
      a match. . . . There was a flash of bright light in the darkness, which
      lighted up the weeping figure. It was Kisotchka!”
    

      “Marvels upon marvels!” said Von Schtenberg with a sigh.
      “Black night, the murmur of the sea; she in grief, he with a
      sensation of world—solitude. . . . It’s too much of a good
      thing. . . . You only want Circassians with daggers to complete it.”
    

      “I am not telling you a tale, but fact.”
    

      “Well, even if it is a fact . . . it all proves nothing, and there
      is nothing new in it. . . .”
    

      “Wait a little before you find fault! Let me finish,” said
      Ananyev, waving his hand with vexation; “don’t interfere,
      please! I am not telling you, but the doctor. . . . Well,” he went
      on, addressing me and glancing askance at the student who bent over his
      books and seemed very well satisfied at having gibed at the engineer—“well,
      Kisotchka was not surprised or frightened at seeing me. It seemed as
      though she had known beforehand that she would find me in the
      summer-house. She was breathing in gasps and trembling all over as though
      in a fever, while her tear-stained face, so far as I could distinguish it
      as I struck match after match, was not the intelligent, submissive weary
      face I had seen before, but something different, which I cannot understand
      to this day. It did not express pain, nor anxiety, nor misery—nothing
      of what was expressed by her words and her tears. . . . I must own that,
      probably because I did not understand it, it looked to me senseless and as
      though she were drunk.
    

      “‘I can’t bear it,’ muttered Kisotchka in the
      voice of a crying child. ‘It’s too much for me, Nikolay
      Anastasyitch. Forgive me, Nikolav Anastasyitch. I can’t go on living
      like this. . . . I am going to the town to my mother’s. . . . Take
      me there. . . . Take me there, for God’s sake!’
    

      “In the presence of tears I can neither speak nor be silent. I was
      flustered and muttered some nonsense trying to comfort her.
    

      “‘No, no; I will go to my mother’s,’ said
      Kisotchka resolutely, getting up and clutching my arm convulsively (her
      hands and her sleeves were wet with tears). ‘Forgive me, Nikolay
      Anastasyitch, I am going. . . . I can bear no more. . . .’
    

      “‘Kisotchka, but there isn’t a single cab,’ I
      said. ‘How can you go?’
    

      “‘No matter, I’ll walk. . . . It’s not far. I can’t
      bear it. . . .’
    

      “I was embarrassed, but not touched. Kisotchka’s tears, her
      trembling, and the blank expression of her face suggested to me a trivial,
      French or Little Russian melodrama, in which every ounce of cheap shallow
      feeling is washed down with pints of tears.
    

      “I didn’t understand her, and knew I did not understand her; I ought
      to have been silent, but for some reason, most likely for fear my silence
      might be taken for stupidity, I thought fit to try to persuade her not to
      go to her mother’s, but to stay at home. When people cry, they don’t
      like their tears to be seen. And I lighted match after match and went on
      striking till the box was empty. What I wanted with this ungenerous
      illumination, I can’t conceive to this day. Cold-hearted people are
      apt to be awkward, and even stupid.
    

      “In the end Kisotchka took my arm and we set off. Going out of the
      gate, we turned to the right and sauntered slowly along the soft dusty
      road. It was dark. As my eyes grew gradually accustomed to the darkness, I
      began to distinguish the silhouettes of the old gaunt oaks and lime trees
      which bordered the road. The jagged, precipitous cliffs, intersected here
      and there by deep, narrow ravines and creeks, soon showed indistinctly, a
      black streak on the right. Low bushes nestled by the hollows, looking like
      sitting figures. It was uncanny. I looked sideways suspiciously at the
      cliffs, and the murmur of the sea and the stillness of the country alarmed
      my imagination. Kisotchka did not speak. She was still trembling, and
      before she had gone half a mile she was exhausted with walking and was out
      of breath. I too was silent.
    

      “Three-quarters of a mile from the Quarantine Station there was a
      deserted building of four storeys, with a very high chimney in which there
      had once been a steam flour mill. It stood solitary on the cliff, and by
      day it could be seen for a long distance, both by sea and by land. Because
      it was deserted and no one lived in it, and because there was an echo in
      it which distinctly repeated the steps and voices of passers-by, it seemed
      mysterious. Picture me in the dark night arm-in-arm with a woman who was
      running away from her husband near this tall long monster which repeated
      the sound of every step I took and stared at me fixedly with its hundred
      black windows. A normal young man would have been moved to romantic
      feelings in such surroundings, but I looked at the dark windows and
      thought: ‘All this is very impressive, but time will come when of
      that building and of Kisotchka and her troubles and of me with my
      thoughts, not one grain of dust will remain. . . . All is nonsense and
      vanity. . . .’
    

      “When we reached the flour mill Kisotchka suddenly stopped, took her
      arm out of mine, and said, no longer in a childish voice, but in her own:
    

      “‘Nikolay Anastasvitch, I know all this seems strange to you.
      But I am terribly unhappy! And you cannot even imagine how unhappy! It’s
      impossible to imagine it! I don’t tell you about it because one can’t
      talk about it. . . . Such a life, such a life! . . .’
    

      “Kisotchka did not finish. She clenched her teeth and moaned as
      though she were doing her utmost not to scream with pain.
    

      “‘Such a life!’ she repeated with horror, with the
      cadence and the southern, rather Ukrainian accent which particularly in
      women gives to emotional speech the effect of singing. ‘It is a
      life! Ah, my God, my God! what does it mean? Oh, my God, my God!’
    

      “As though trying to solve the riddle of her fate, she shrugged her
      shoulders in perplexity, shook her head, and clasped her hands. She spoke
      as though she were singing, moved gracefully, and reminded me of a
      celebrated Little Russian actress.
    

      “‘Great God, it is as though I were in a pit,’ she went
      on. ‘If one could live for one minute in happiness as other people
      live! Oh, my God, my God! I have come to such disgrace that before a
      stranger I am running away from my husband by night, like some
      disreputable creature! Can I expect anything good after that?’
    

      “As I admired her movements and her voice, I began to feel annoyed
      that she was not on good terms with her husband. ‘It would be nice
      to have got on into relations with her!’ flitted through my mind;
      and this pitiless thought stayed in my brain, haunted me all the way and
      grew more and more alluring.
    

      “About a mile from the flour mill we had to turn to the left by the
      cemetery. At the turning by the corner of the cemetery there stood a stone
      windmill, and by it a little hut in which the miller lived. We passed the
      mill and the hut, turned to the left and reached the gates of the
      cemetery. There Kisotchka stopped and said:
    

      “‘I am going back, Nikolay Anastasyitch! You go home, and God
      bless you, but I am going back. I am not frightened.’
    

      “‘Well, what next!’ I said, disconcerted. ‘If you
      are going, you had better go!’
    

      “‘I have been too hasty. . . . It was all about nothing that
      mattered. You and your talk took me back to the past and put all sort of
      ideas into my head. . . . I was sad and wanted to cry, and my husband said
      rude things to me before that officer, and I could not bear it. . . . And
      what’s the good of my going to the town to my mother’s? Will
      that make me any happier? I must go back. . . . But never mind . . . let
      us go on,’ said Kisotchka, and she laughed. 'It makes no difference!’
    

      “I remembered that over the gate of the cemetery there was an
      inscription: ‘The hour will come wherein all they that lie in the
      grave will hear the voice of the Son of God.’ I knew very well that
      sooner or later I and Kisotchka and her husband and the officer in the
      white tunic would lie under the dark trees in the churchyard; I knew that
      an unhappy and insulted fellow-creature was walking beside me. All this I
      recognised distinctly, but at the same time I was troubled by an
      oppressive and unpleasant dread that Kisotchka would turn back, and that I
      should not manage to say to her what had to be said. Never at any other
      time in my life have thoughts of a higher order been so closely interwoven
      with the basest animal prose as on that night. . . . It was horrible!
    

      “Not far from the cemetery we found a cab. When we reached the High
      Street, where Kisotchka’s mother lived, we dismissed the cab and
      walked along the pavement. Kisotchka was silent all the while, while I
      looked at her, and I raged at myself, ‘Why don’t you begin?
      Now’s the time!’ About twenty paces from the hotel where I was
      staying, Kisotchka stopped by the lamp-post and burst into tears.
    

      “‘Nikolay Anastasyitch!’ she said, crying and laughing
      and looking at me with wet shining eyes, ‘I shall never forget your
      sympathy . . . . How good you are! All of you are so splendid—all of
      you! Honest, great-hearted, kind, clever. . . . Ah, how good that is!’
    

      “She saw in me a highly educated man, advanced in every sense of the
      word, and on her tear-stained laughing face, together with the emotion and
      enthusiasm aroused by my personality, there was clearly written regret
      that she so rarely saw such people, and that God had not vouchsafed her
      the bliss of being the wife of one of them. She muttered, ‘Ah, how
      splendid it is!’ The childish gladness on her face, the tears, the
      gentle smile, the soft hair, which had escaped from under the kerchief,
      and the kerchief itself thrown carelessly over her head, in the light of
      the street lamp reminded me of the old Kisotchka whom one had wanted to
      stroke like a kitten.
    

      “I could not restrain myself, and began stroking her hair, her
      shoulders, and her hands.
    

      “‘Kisotchka, what do you want?’ I muttered. ‘I’ll
      go to the ends of the earth with you if you like! I will take you out of
      this hole and give you happiness. I love you. . . . Let us go, my sweet?
      Yes? Will you?’
    

      “Kisotchka’s face was flooded with bewilderment. She stepped
      back from the street lamp and, completely overwhelmed, gazed at me with
      wide-open eyes. I gripped her by the arm, began showering kisses on her
      face, her neck, her shoulders, and went on making vows and promises. In
      love affairs vows and promises are almost a physiological necessity. There’s
      no getting on without them. Sometimes you know you are lying and that
      promises are not necessary, but still you vow and protest. Kisotchka,
      utterly overwhelmed, kept staggering back and gazing at me with round
      eyes.
    

      “‘Please don’t! Please don’t!’ she muttered,
      holding me off with her hands.
    

      “I clasped her tightly in my arms. All at once she broke into
      hysterical tears. And her face had the same senseless blank expression
      that I had seen in the summer-house when I lighted the matches. Without
      asking her consent, preventing her from speaking, I dragged her forcibly
      towards my hotel. She seemed almost swooning and did not walk, but I took
      her under the arms and almost carried her. . . . I remember, as we were
      going up the stairs, some man with a red band in his cap looked
      wonderingly at me and bowed to Kisotchka. . . .”
    

      Ananyev flushed crimson and paused. He walked up and down near the table
      in silence, scratched the back of his head with an air of vexation, and
      several times shrugged his shoulders and twitched his shoulder-blades,
      while a shiver ran down his huge back. The memory was painful and made him
      ashamed, and he was struggling with himself.
    

      “It’s horrible!” he said, draining a glass of wine and
      shaking his head. “I am told that in every introductory lecture on
      women’s diseases the medical students are admonished to remember
      that each one of them has a mother, a sister, a fiancÃ©e, before undressing
      and examining a female patient. . . . That advice would be very good not
      only for medical students but for everyone who in one way or another has
      to deal with a woman’s life. Now that I have a wife and a little
      daughter, oh, how well I understand that advice! How I understand it, my
      God! You may as well hear the rest, though. . . . As soon as she had
      become my mistress, Kisotchka’s view of the position was very
      different from mine. First of all she felt for me a deep and passionate
      love. What was for me an ordinary amatory episode was for her an absolute
      revolution in her life. I remember, it seemed to me that she had gone out
      of her mind. Happy for the first time in her life, looking five years
      younger, with an inspired enthusiastic face, not knowing what to do with
      herself for happiness, she laughed and cried and never ceased dreaming
      aloud how next day we would set off for the Caucasus, then in the autumn
      to Petersburg; how we would live afterwards.
    

      “‘Don’t worry yourself about my husband,’ she said
      to reassure me. 'He is bound to give me a divorce. Everyone in the town
      knows that he is living with the elder Kostovitch. We will get a divorce
      and be married.’
    

      “When women love they become acclimatised and at home with people
      very quickly, like cats. Kisotchka had only spent an hour and a half in my
      room when she already felt as though she were at home and was ready to
      treat my property as though it were her own. She packed my things in my
      portmanteau, scolded me for not hanging my new expensive overcoat on a peg
      instead of flinging it on a chair, and so on.
    

      “I looked at her, listened, and felt weariness and vexation. I was
      conscious of a slight twinge of horror at the thought that a respectable,
      honest, and unhappy woman had so easily, after some three or four hours,
      succumbed to the first man she met. As a respectable man, you see, I didn’t
      like it. Then, too, I was unpleasantly impressed by the fact that women of
      Kisotchka’s sort, not deep or serious, are too much in love with
      life, and exalt what is in reality such a trifle as love for a man to the
      level of bliss, misery, a complete revolution in life. . . . Moreover, now
      that I was satisfied, I was vexed with myself for having been so stupid as
      to get entangled with a woman whom I should have to deceive. And in spite
      of my disorderly life I must observe that I could not bear telling lies.
    

      “I remember that Kisotchka sat down at my feet, laid her head on my
      knees, and, looking at me with shining, loving eyes, asked:
    

      “‘Kolya, do you love me? Very, very much?’
    

      “And she laughed with happiness. . . . This struck me as
      sentimental, affected, and not clever; and meanwhile I was already
      inclined to look for ‘depth of thought’ before everything.
    

      “‘Kisotchka, you had better go home,’ I said, or else
      your people will be sure to miss you and will be looking for you all over
      the town; and it would be awkward for you to go to your mother in the
      morning.’
    

      “Kisotchka agreed. At parting we arranged to meet at midday next
      morning in the park, and the day after to set off together to Pyatigorsk.
      I went into the street to see her home, and I remember that I caressed her
      with genuine tenderness on the way. There was a minute when I felt
      unbearably sorry for her, for trusting me so implicitly, and I made up my
      mind that I would really take her to Pyatigorsk, but remembering that I
      had only six hundred roubles in my portmanteau, and that it would be far
      more difficult to break it off with her in the autumn than now, I made
      haste to suppress my compassion.
    

      “We reached the house where Kisotchka’s mother lived. I pulled
      at the bell. When footsteps were heard at the other side of the door
      Kisotchka suddenly looked grave, glanced upwards to the sky, made the sign
      of the Cross over me several times and, clutching my hand, pressed it to
      her lips.
    

      “‘Till to-morrow,’ she said, and disappeared into the
      house.
    

      “I crossed to the opposite pavement and from there looked at the
      house. At first the windows were in darkness, then in one of the windows
      there was the glimmer of the faint bluish flame of a newly lighted candle;
      the flame grew, gave more light, and I saw shadows moving about the rooms
      together with it.
    

      “‘They did not expect her,’ I thought.
    

      “Returning to my hotel room I undressed, drank off a glass of red
      wine, ate some fresh caviare which I had bought that day in the bazaar,
      went to bed in a leisurely way, and slept the sound, untroubled sleep of a
      tourist.
    

      “In the morning I woke up with a headache and in a bad humour.
      Something worried me.
    

      “‘What’s the matter?’ I asked myself, trying to
      explain my uneasiness. 'What’s upsetting me?’
    

      “And I put down my uneasiness to the dread that Kisotchka might turn
      up any minute and prevent my going away, and that I should have to tell
      lies and act a part before her. I hurriedly dressed, packed my things, and
      left the hotel, giving instructions to the porter to take my luggage to
      the station for the seven o’clock train in the evening. I spent the
      whole day with a doctor friend and left the town that evening. As you see,
      my philosophy did not prevent me from taking to my heels in a mean and
      treacherous flight. . . .
    

      “All the while that I was at my friend’s, and afterwards
      driving to the station, I was tormented by anxiety. I fancied that I was
      afraid of meeting with Kisotchka and a scene. In the station I purposely
      remained in the toilet room till the second bell rang, and while I was
      making my way to my compartment, I was oppressed by a feeling as though I
      were covered all over with stolen things. With what impatience and terror
      I waited for the third bell!
    

      “At last the third bell that brought my deliverance rang at last,
      the train moved; we passed the prison, the barracks, came out into the
      open country, and yet, to my surprise, the feeling of uneasiness still
      persisted, and still I felt like a thief passionately longing to escape.
      It was queer. To distract my mind and calm myself I looked out of the
      window. The train ran along the coast. The sea was smooth, and the
      turquoise sky, almost half covered with the tender, golden crimson light
      of sunset, was gaily and serenely mirrored in it. Here and there fishing
      boats and rafts made black patches on its surface. The town, as clean and
      beautiful as a toy, stood on the high cliff, and was already shrouded in
      the mist of evening. The golden domes of its churches, the windows and the
      greenery reflected the setting sun, glowing and melting like shimmering
      gold. . . . The scent of the fields mingled with the soft damp air from
      the sea.
    

      “The train flew rapidly along. I heard the laughter of passengers
      and guards. Everyone was good-humoured and light-hearted, yet my
      unaccountable uneasiness grew greater and greater. . . . I looked at the
      white mist that covered the town and I imagined how a woman with a
      senseless blank face was hurrying up and down in that mist by the churches
      and the houses, looking for me and moaning, ‘Oh, my God! Oh, my God!’
      in the voice of a little girl or the cadences of a Little Russian actress.
      I recalled her grave face and big anxious eyes as she made the sign of the
      Cross over me, as though I belonged to her, and mechanically I looked at
      the hand which she had kissed the day before.
    

      “‘Surely I am not in love?’ I asked myself, scratching
      my hand.
    

      “Only as night came on when the passengers were asleep and I was
      left tÃªte-Ã -tÃªte with my conscience, I began to understand what I
      had not been able to grasp before. In the twilight of the railway carriage
      the image of Kisotchka rose before me, haunted me and I recognised clearly
      that I had committed a crime as bad as murder. My conscience tormented me.
      To stifle this unbearable feeling, I assured myself that everything was
      nonsense and vanity, that Kisotchka and I would die and decay, that her
      grief was nothing in comparison with death, and so on and so on . . . and
      that if you come to that, there is no such thing as freewill, and that
      therefore I was not to blame. But all these arguments only irritated me
      and were extraordinarily quickly crowded out by other thoughts. There was
      a miserable feeling in the hand that Kisotchka had kissed. . . . I kept
      lying down and getting up again, drank vodka at the stations, forced
      myself to eat bread and butter, fell to assuring myself again that life
      had no meaning, but nothing was of any use. A strange and if you like
      absurd ferment was going on in my brain. The most incongruous ideas
      crowded one after another in disorder, getting more and more tangled,
      thwarting each other, and I, the thinker, 'with my brow bent on the earth,’
      could make out nothing and could not find my bearings in this mass of
      essential and non-essential ideas. It appeared that I, the thinker, had
      not mastered the technique of thinking, and that I was no more capable of
      managing my own brain than mending a watch. For the first time in my life
      I was really thinking eagerly and intensely, and that seemed to me so
      monstrous that I said to myself: ‘I am going off my head.’ A
      man whose brain does not work at all times, but only at painful moments,
      is often haunted by the thought of madness.
    

      “I spent a day and a night in this misery, then a second night, and
      learning from experience how little my philosophy was to me, I came to my
      senses and realised at last what sort of a creature I was. I saw that my
      ideas were not worth a brass farthing, and that before meeting Kisotchka I
      had not begun to think and had not even a conception of what thinking in
      earnest meant; now through suffering I realised that I had neither
      convictions nor a definite moral standard, nor heart, nor reason; my whole
      intellectual and moral wealth consisted of specialist knowledge,
      fragments, useless memories, other people’s ideas—and nothing
      else; and my mental processes were as lacking in complexity, as useless
      and as rudimentary as a Yakut’s. . . . If I had disliked lying, had
      not stolen, had not murdered, and, in fact, made obviously gross mistakes,
      that was not owing to my convictions—I had none, but because I was
      in bondage, hand and foot, to my nurse’s fairy tales and to
      copy-book morals, which had entered into my flesh and blood and without my
      noticing it guided me in life, though I looked on them as absurd. . . .
    

      “I realised that I was not a thinker, not a philosopher, but simply
      a dilettante. God had given me a strong healthy Russian brain with promise
      of talent. And, only fancy, here was that brain at twenty-six,
      undisciplined, completely free from principles, not weighed down by any
      stores of knowledge, but only lightly sprinkled with information of a sort
      in the engineering line; it was young and had a physiological craving for
      exercise, it was on the look-out for it, when all at once quite casually
      the fine juicy idea of the aimlessness of life and the darkness beyond the
      tomb descends upon it. It greedily sucks it in, puts its whole outlook at
      its disposal and begins playing with it, like a cat with a mouse. There is
      neither learning nor system in the brain, but that does not matter. It
      deals with the great ideas with its own innate powers, like a
      self-educated man, and before a month has passed the owner of the brain
      can turn a potato into a hundred dainty dishes, and fancies himself a
      philosopher . . . .
    

      “Our generation has carried this dilettantism, this playing with
      serious ideas into science, into literature, into politics, and into
      everything which it is not too lazy to go into, and with its dilettantism
      has introduced, too, its coldness, its boredom, and its one-sidedness and,
      as it seems to me, it has already succeeded in developing in the masses a
      new hitherto non-existent attitude to serious ideas.
    

      “I realised and appreciated my abnormality and utter ignorance,
      thanks to a misfortune. My normal thinking, so it seems to me now, dates
      from the day when I began again from the A, B, C, when my conscience sent
      me flying back to N., when with no philosophical subleties I repented,
      besought Kisotchka’s forgiveness like a naughty boy and wept with
      her. . . .”
    

      Ananyev briefly described his last interview with Kisotchka.
    

      “H’m. . . .” the student filtered through his teeth when
      the engineer had finished. “That’s the sort of thing that
      happens.”
    

      His face still expressed mental inertia, and apparently Ananyev’s
      story had not touched him in the least. Only when the engineer after a
      moment’s pause, began expounding his view again and repeating what
      he had said at first, the student frowned irritably, got up from the table
      and walked away to his bed. He made his bed and began undressing.
    

      “You look as though you have really convinced some one this time,”
      he said irritably.
    

      “Me convince anybody!” said the engineer. “My dear soul,
      do you suppose I claim to do that? God bless you! To convince you is
      impossible. You can reach conviction only by way of personal experience
      and suffering!”
    

      “And then—it’s queer logic!” grumbled the student
      as he put on his nightshirt. “The ideas which you so dislike, which
      are so ruinous for the young are, according to you, the normal thing for
      the old; it’s as though it were a question of grey hairs. . . .
      Where do the old get this privilege? What is it based upon? If these ideas
      are poison, they are equally poisonous for all?”
    

      “Oh, no, my dear soul, don’t say so!” said the engineer
      with a sly wink. “Don’t say so. In the first place, old men
      are not dilettanti. Their pessimism comes to them not casually from
      outside, but from the depths of their own brains, and only after they have
      exhaustively studied the Hegels and Kants of all sorts, have suffered,
      have made no end of mistakes, in fact—when they have climbed the
      whole ladder from bottom to top. Their pessimism has both personal
      experience and sound philosophic training behind it. Secondly, the
      pessimism of old thinkers does not take the form of idle talk, as it does
      with you and me, but of Weltschmertz, of suffering; it rests in
      them on a Christian foundation because it is derived from love for
      humanity and from thoughts about humanity, and is entirely free from the
      egoism which is noticeable in dilettanti. You despise life because its
      meaning and its object are hidden just from you, and you are only afraid
      of your own death, while the real thinker is unhappy because the truth is
      hidden from all and he is afraid for all men. For instance, there is
      living not far from here the Crown forester, Ivan Alexandritch. He is a
      nice old man. At one time he was a teacher somewhere, and used to write
      something; the devil only knows what he was, but anyway he is a remarkably
      clever fellow and in philosophy he is A1. He has read a great deal and he
      is continually reading now. Well, we came across him lately in the
      Gruzovsky district. . . . They were laying the sleepers and rails just at
      the time. It’s not a difficult job, but Ivan Alexandritch, not being
      a specialist, looked at it as though it were a conjuring trick. It takes
      an experienced workman less than a minute to lay a sleeper and fix a rail
      on it. The workmen were in good form and really were working smartly and
      rapidly; one rascal in particular brought his hammer down with exceptional
      smartness on the head of the nail and drove it in at one blow, though the
      handle of the hammer was two yards or more in length and each nail was a
      foot long. Ivan Alexandritch watched the workmen a long time, was moved,
      and said to me with tears in his eyes:
    

      “‘What a pity that these splendid men will die!’ Such
      pessimism I understand.”
    

      “All that proves nothing and explains nothing,” said the
      student, covering himself up with a sheet; “all that is simply
      pounding liquid in a mortar. No one knows anything and nothing can be
      proved by words.”
    

      He peeped out from under the sheet, lifted up his head and, frowning
      irritably, said quickly:
    

      “One must be very naÃ¯ve to believe in human words and logic and to
      ascribe any determining value to them. You can prove and disprove anything
      you like with words, and people will soon perfect the technique of
      language to such a point that they will prove with mathematical certainty
      that twice two is seven. I am fond of reading and listening, but as to
      believing, no thank you; I can’t, and I don’t want to. I
      believe only in God, but as for you, if you talk to me till the Second
      Coming and seduce another five hundred Kisothchkas, I shall believe in you
      only when I go out of my mind . . . . Goodnight.”
    

      The student hid his head under the sheet and turned his face towards the
      wall, meaning by this action to let us know that he did not want to speak
      or listen. The argument ended at that.
    

      Before going to bed the engineer and I went out of the hut, and I saw the
      lights once more.
    

      “We have tired you out with our chatter,” said Ananyev,
      yawning and looking at the sky. “Well, my good sir! The only
      pleasure we have in this dull hole is drinking and philosophising. . . .
      What an embankment, Lord have mercy on us!” he said admiringly, as
      we approached the embankment; “it is more like Mount Ararat than an
      embankment.”
    

      He paused for a little, then said: “Those lights remind the Baron of
      the Amalekites, but it seems to me that they are like the thoughts of man.
      . . . You know the thoughts of each individual man are scattered like that
      in disorder, stretch in a straight line towards some goal in the midst of
      the darkness and, without shedding light on anything, without lighting up
      the night, they vanish somewhere far beyond old age. But enough
      philosophising! It’s time to go bye-bye.”
    

      When we were back in the hut the engineer began begging me to take his
      bed.
    

      “Oh please!” he said imploringly, pressing both hands on his
      heart. “I entreat you, and don’t worry about me! I can sleep
      anywhere, and, besides, I am not going to bed just yet. Please do—it’s
      a favour!”
    

      I agreed, undressed, and went to bed, while he sat down to the table and
      set to work on the plans.
    

      “We fellows have no time for sleep,” he said in a low voice
      when I had got into bed and shut my eyes. “When a man has a wife and
      two children he can’t think of sleep. One must think now of food and
      clothes and saving for the future. And I have two of them, a little son
      and a daughter. . . . The boy, little rascal, has a jolly little face. He’s
      not six yet, and already he shows remarkable abilities, I assure you. . .
      . I have their photographs here, somewhere. . . . Ah, my children, my
      children!”
    

      He rummaged among his papers, found their photographs, and began looking
      at them. I fell asleep.
    

      I was awakened by the barking of Azorka and loud voices. Von Schtenberg
      with bare feet and ruffled hair was standing in the doorway dressed in his
      underclothes, talking loudly with some one . . . . It was getting light. A
      gloomy dark blue dawn was peeping in at the door, at the windows, and
      through the crevices in the hut walls, and casting a faint light on my
      bed, on the table with the papers, and on Ananyev. Stretched on the floor
      on a cloak, with a leather pillow under his head, the engineer lay asleep
      with his fleshy, hairy chest uppermost; he was snoring so loudly that I
      pitied the student from the bottom of my heart for having to sleep in the
      same room with him every night.
    

      “Why on earth are we to take them?” shouted Von Schtenberg.
      “It has nothing to do with us! Go to Tchalisov! From whom do the
      cauldrons come?”
    

      “From Nikitin . . .” a bass voice answered gruffly.
    

      “Well, then, take them to Tchalisov. . . . That’s not in our
      department. What the devil are you standing there for? Drive on!”
    

      “Your honour, we have been to Tchalisov already,” said the
      bass voice still more gruffly. “Yesterday we were the whole day
      looking for him down the line, and were told at his hut that he had gone
      to the Dymkovsky section. Please take them, your honour! How much longer
      are we to go carting them about? We go carting them on and on along the
      line, and see no end to it.”
    

      “What is it?” Ananyev asked huskily, waking up and lifting his
      head quickly.
    

      “They have brought some cauldrons from Nikitin’s,” said
      the student, “and he is begging us to take them. And what business
      is it of ours to take them?”
    

      “Do be so kind, your honour, and set things right! The horses have
      been two days without food and the master, for sure, will be angry. Are we
      to take them back, or what? The railway ordered the cauldrons, so it ought
      to take them. . . .”
    

      “Can’t you understand, you blockhead, that it has nothing to
      do with us? Go on to Tchalisov!”
    

      “What is it? Who’s there?” Ananyev asked huskily again.
      “Damnation take them all,” he said, getting up and going to
      the door. “What is it?”
    

      I dressed, and two minutes later went out of the hut. Ananyev and the
      student, both in their underclothes and barefooted, were angrily and
      impatiently explaining to a peasant who was standing before them
      bare-headed, with his whip in his hand, apparently not understanding them.
      Both faces looked preoccupied with workaday cares.
    

      “What use are your cauldrons to me,” shouted Ananyev. “Am
      I to put them on my head, or what? If you can’t find Tchalisov, find
      his assistant, and leave us in peace!”
    

      Seeing me, the student probably recalled the conversation of the previous
      night. The workaday expression vanished from his sleepy face and a look of
      mental inertia came into it. He waved the peasant off and walked away
      absorbed in thought.
    

      It was a cloudy morning. On the line where the lights had been gleaming
      the night before, the workmen, just roused from sleep, were swarming.
      There was a sound of voices and the squeaking of wheelbarrows. The working
      day was beginning. One poor little nag harnessed with cord was already
      plodding towards the embankment, tugging with its neck, and dragging along
      a cartful of sand.
    

      I began saying good-bye. . . . A great deal had been said in the night,
      but I carried away with me no answer to any question, and in the morning,
      of the whole conversation there remained in my memory, as in a filter,
      only the lights and the image of Kisotchka. As I got on the horse, I
      looked at the student and Ananyev for the last time, at the hysterical dog
      with the lustreless, tipsy-looking eyes, at the workmen flitting to and
      fro in the morning fog, at the embankment, at the little nag straining
      with its neck, and thought:
    

      “There is no making out anything in this world.”
    

      And when I lashed my horse and galloped along the line, and when a little
      later I saw nothing before me but the endless gloomy plain and the cold
      overcast sky, I recalled the questions which were discussed in the night.
      I pondered while the sun-scorched plain, the immense sky, the oak forest,
      dark on the horizon and the hazy distance, seemed saying to me:
    

      “Yes, there’s no understanding anything in this world!”
    

      The sun began to rise. . . .
    











      A STORY WITHOUT AN END
    

SOON after two o’clock
      one night, long ago, the cook, pale and agitated, rushed unexpectedly into
      my study and informed me that Madame Mimotih, the old woman who owned the
      house next door, was sitting in her kitchen.
    

      “She begs you to go in to her, sir . . .” said the cook,
      panting. “Something bad has happened about her lodger. . . . He has
      shot himself or hanged himself. . . .”
    

      “What can I do?” said I. “Let her go for the doctor or
      for the police!”
    

      “How is she to look for a doctor! She can hardly breathe, and she
      has huddled under the stove, she is so frightened. . . . You had better go
      round, sir.”
    

      I put on my coat and hat and went to Madame Mimotih’s house. The
      gate towards which I directed my steps was open. After pausing beside it,
      uncertain what to do, I went into the yard without feeling for the porter’s
      bell. In the dark and dilapidated porch the door was not locked. I opened
      it and walked into the entry. Here there was not a glimmer of light, it
      was pitch dark, and, moreover, there was a marked smell of incense.
      Groping my way out of the entry I knocked my elbow against something made
      of iron, and in the darkness stumbled against a board of some sort which
      almost fell to the floor. At last the door covered with torn baize was
      found, and I went into a little hall.
    

      I am not at the moment writing a fairy tale, and am far from intending to
      alarm the reader, but the picture I saw from the passage was fantastic and
      could only have been drawn by death. Straight before me was a door leading
      to a little drawing-room. Three five-kopeck wax candles, standing in a
      row, threw a scanty light on the faded slate-coloured wallpaper. A coffin
      was standing on two tables in the middle of the little room. The two
      candles served only to light up a swarthy yellow face with a half-open
      mouth and sharp nose. Billows of muslin were mingled in disorder from the
      face to the tips of the two shoes, and from among the billows peeped out
      two pale motionless hands, holding a wax cross. The dark gloomy corners of
      the little drawing-room, the ikons behind the coffin, the coffin itself,
      everything except the softly glimmering lights, were still as death, as
      the tomb itself.
    

      “How strange!” I thought, dumbfoundered by the unexpected
      panorama of death. “Why this haste? The lodger has hardly had time
      to hang himself, or shoot himself, and here is the coffin already!”
    

      I looked round. On the left there was a door with a glass panel; on the
      right a lame hat-stand with a shabby fur coat on it. . . .
    

      “Water. . . .” I heard a moan.
    

      The moan came from the left, beyond the door with the glass panel. I
      opened the door and walked into a little dark room with a solitary window,
      through which there came a faint light from a street lamp outside.
    

      “Is anyone here?” I asked.
    

      And without waiting for an answer I struck a match. This is what I saw
      while it was burning. A man was sitting on the blood-stained floor at my
      very feet. If my step had been a longer one I should have trodden on him.
      With his legs thrust forward and his hands pressed on the floor, he was
      making an effort to raise his handsome face, which was deathly pale
      against his pitch-black beard. In the big eyes which he lifted upon me, I
      read unutterable terror, pain, and entreaty. A cold sweat trickled in big
      drops down his face. That sweat, the expression of his face, the trembling
      of the hands he leaned upon, his hard breathing and his clenched teeth,
      showed that he was suffering beyond endurance. Near his right hand in a
      pool of blood lay a revolver.
    

      “Don’t go away,” I heard a faint voice when the match
      had gone out. “There’s a candle on the table.”
    

      I lighted the candle and stood still in the middle of the room not knowing
      what to do next. I stood and looked at the man on the floor, and it seemed
      to me that I had seen him before.
    

      “The pain is insufferable,” he whispered, “and I haven’t
      the strength to shoot myself again. Incomprehensible lack of will.”
    

      I flung off my overcoat and attended to the sick man. Lifting him from the
      floor like a baby, I laid him on the American-leather covered sofa and
      carefully undressed him. He was shivering and cold when I took off his
      clothes; the wound which I saw was not in keeping either with his
      shivering nor the expression on his face. It was a trifling one. The
      bullet had passed between the fifth and sixth ribs on the left side, only
      piercing the skin and the flesh. I found the bullet itself in the folds of
      the coat-lining near the back pocket. Stopping the bleeding as best I
      could and making a temporary bandage of a pillow-case, a towel, and two
      handkerchiefs, I gave the wounded man some water and covered him with a
      fur coat that was hanging in the passage. We neither of us said a word
      while the bandaging was being done. I did my work while he lay motionless
      looking at me with his eyes screwed up as though he were ashamed of his
      unsuccessful shot and the trouble he was giving me.
    

      “Now I must trouble you to lie still,” I said, when I had
      finished the bandaging, “while I run to the chemist and get
      something.”
    

      “No need!” he muttered, clutching me by the sleeve and opening
      his eyes wide.
    

      I read terror in his eyes. He was afraid of my going away.
    

      “No need! Stay another five minutes . . . ten. If it doesn’t
      disgust you, do stay, I entreat you.”
    

      As he begged me he was trembling and his teeth were chattering. I obeyed,
      and sat down on the edge of the sofa. Ten minutes passed in silence. I sat
      silent, looking about the room into which fate had brought me so
      unexpectedly. What poverty! This man who was the possessor of a handsome,
      effeminate face and a luxuriant well-tended beard, had surroundings which
      a humble working man would not have envied. A sofa with its
      American-leather torn and peeling, a humble greasy-looking chair, a table
      covered with a little of paper, and a wretched oleograph on the wall, that
      was all I saw. Damp, gloomy, and grey.
    

      “What a wind!” said the sick man, without opening his eyes,
      “How it whistles!”
    

      “Yes,” I said. “I say, I fancy I know you. Didn’t
      you take part in some private theatricals in General Luhatchev’s
      villa last year?”
    

      “What of it?” he asked, quickly opening his eyes.
    

      A cloud seemed to pass over his face.
    

      “I certainly saw you there. Isn’t your name Vassilyev?”
    

      “If it is, what of it? It makes it no better that you should know
      me.”
    

      “No, but I just asked you.”
    

      Vassilyev closed his eyes and, as though offended, turned his face to the
      back of the sofa.
    

      “I don’t understand your curiosity,” he muttered.
      “You’ll be asking me next what it was drove me to commit
      suicide!”
    

      Before a minute had passed, he turned round towards me again, opened his
      eyes and said in a tearful voice:
    

      “Excuse me for taking such a tone, but you’ll admit I’m
      right! To ask a convict how he got into prison, or a suicide why he shot
      himself is not generous . . . and indelicate. To think of gratifying idle
      curiosity at the expense of another man’s nerves!”
    

      “There is no need to excite yourself. . . . It never occurred to me
      to question you about your motives.”
    

      “You would have asked. . . . It’s what people always do.
      Though it would be no use to ask. If I told you, you would not believe or
      understand. . . . I must own I don’t understand it myself. . . .
      There are phrases used in the police reports and newspapers such as:
      ‘unrequited love,’ and ‘hopeless poverty,’ but the
      reasons are not known. . . . They are not known to me, nor to you, nor to
      your newspaper offices, where they have the impudence to write ‘The
      diary of a suicide.’ God alone understands the state of a man’s
      soul when he takes his own life; but men know nothing about it.”
    

      “That is all very nice,” I said, “but you oughtn’t
      to talk. . . .”
    

      But my suicide could not be stopped, he leaned his head on his fist, and
      went on in the tone of some great professor:
    

      “Man will never understand the psychological subtleties of suicide!
      How can one speak of reasons? To-day the reason makes one snatch up a
      revolver, while to-morrow the same reason seems not worth a rotten egg. It
      all depends most likely on the particular condition of the individual at
      the given moment. . . . Take me for instance. Half an hour ago, I had a
      passionate desire for death, now when the candle is lighted, and you are
      sitting by me, I don’t even think of the hour of death. Explain that
      change if you can! Am I better off, or has my wife risen from the dead? Is
      it the influence of the light on me, or the presence of an outsider?”
    

      “The light certainly has an influence . . .” I muttered for
      the sake of saying something. “The influence of light on the
      organism . . . .”
    

      “The influence of light. . . . We admit it! But you know men do
      shoot themselves by candle-light! And it would be ignominious indeed for
      the heroes of your novels if such a trifling thing as a candle were to
      change the course of the drama so abruptly. All this nonsense can be
      explained perhaps, but not by us. It’s useless to ask questions or
      give explanations of what one does not understand. . . .”
    

      “Forgive me,” I said, “but . . . judging by the
      expression of your face, it seems to me that at this moment you . . . are
      posing.”
    

      “Yes,” Vassilyev said, startled. “It’s very
      possible! I am naturally vain and fatuous. Well, explain it, if you
      believe in your power of reading faces! Half an hour ago I shot myself,
      and just now I am posing. . . . Explain that if you can.”
    

      These last words Vassilyev pronounced in a faint, failing voice. He was
      exhausted, and sank into silence. A pause followed. I began scrutinising
      his face. It was as pale as a dead man’s. It seemed as though life
      were almost extinct in him, and only the signs of the suffering that the
      “vain and fatuous” man was feeling betrayed that it was still
      alive. It was painful to look at that face, but what must it have been for
      Vassilyev himself who yet had the strength to argue and, if I were not
      mistaken, to pose?
    

      “You here—are you here?” he asked suddenly, raising
      himself on his elbow. “My God, just listen!”
    

      I began listening. The rain was pattering angrily on the dark window,
      never ceasing for a minute. The wind howled plaintively and lugubriously.
    

      “‘And I shall be whiter than snow, and my ears will hear
      gladness and rejoicing.’” Madame Mimotih, who had returned,
      was reading in the drawing-room in a languid, weary voice, neither raising
      nor dropping the monotonous dreary key.
    

      “It is cheerful, isn’t it?” whispered Vassilyev, turning
      his frightened eyes towards me. “My God, the things a man has to see
      and hear! If only one could set this chaos to music! As Hamlet says, 'it
      would—
    

      “Confound the ignorant, and amaze indeed, The very faculties of eyes
      and ears.”
    

      “How well I should have understood that music then! How I should have felt
      it! What time is it?”
    

      “Five minutes to three.”
    

      “Morning is still far off. And in the morning there’s the
      funeral. A lovely prospect! One follows the coffin through the mud and
      rain. One walks along, seeing nothing but the cloudy sky and the wretched
      scenery. The muddy mutes, taverns, woodstacks. . . . One’s trousers
      drenched to the knees. The never-ending streets. The time dragging out
      like eternity, the coarse people. And on the heart a stone, a stone!”
    

      After a brief pause he suddenly asked: “Is it long since you saw
      General Luhatchev?”
    

      “I haven’t seen him since last summer.”
    

      “He likes to be cock of the walk, but he is a nice little old chap.
      And are you still writing?”
    

      “Yes, a little.”
    

      “Ah. . . . Do you remember how I pranced about like a needle, like
      an enthusiastic ass at those private theatricals when I was courting Zina?
      It was stupid, but it was good, it was fun. . . . The very memory of it
      brings back a whiff of spring. . . . And now! What a cruel change of
      scene! There is a subject for you! Only don’t you go in for writing
      ‘the diary of a suicide.’ That’s vulgar and
      conventional. You make something humorous of it.”
    

      “Again you are . . . posing,” I said. “There’s
      nothing humorous in your position.”
    

      “Nothing laughable? You say nothing laughable?” Vassilyev sat
      up, and tears glistened in his eyes. An expression of bitter distress came
      into his pale face. His chin quivered.
    

      “You laugh at the deceit of cheating clerks and faithless wives,”
      he said, “but no clerk, no faithless wife has cheated as my fate has
      cheated me! I have been deceived as no bank depositor, no duped husband
      has ever been deceived! Only realise what an absurd fool I have been made!
      Last year before your eyes I did not know what to do with myself for
      happiness. And now before your eyes. . . .”
    

      Vassilyev’s head sank on the pillow and he laughed.
    

      “Nothing more absurd and stupid than such a change could possibly be
      imagined. Chapter one: spring, love, honeymoon . . . honey, in fact;
      chapter two: looking for a job, the pawnshop, pallor, the chemist’s
      shop, and . . . to-morrow’s splashing through the mud to the
      graveyard.”
    

      He laughed again. I felt acutely uncomfortable and made up my mind to go.
    

      “I tell you what,” I said, “you lie down, and I will go
      to the chemist’s.”
    

      He made no answer. I put on my great-coat and went out of his room. As I
      crossed the passage I glanced at the coffin and Madame Mimotih reading
      over it. I strained my eyes in vain, I could not recognise in the swarthy,
      yellow face Zina, the lively, pretty ingÃ©nue of Luhatchev’s
      company.
    

      “Sic transit,” I thought.
    

      With that I went out, not forgetting to take the revolver, and made my way
      to the chemist’s. But I ought not to have gone away. When I came
      back from the chemist’s, Vassilyev lay on the sofa fainting. The
      bandages had been roughly torn off, and blood was flowing from the
      reopened wound. It was daylight before I succeeded in restoring him to
      consciousness. He was raving in delirium, shivering, and looking with
      unseeing eyes about the room till morning had come, and we heard the
      booming voice of the priest as he read the service over the dead.
    

      When Vassilyev’s rooms were crowded with old women and mutes, when
      the coffin had been moved and carried out of the yard, I advised him to
      remain at home. But he would not obey me, in spite of the pain and the
      grey, rainy morning. He walked bareheaded and in silence behind the coffin
      all the way to the cemetery, hardly able to move one leg after the other,
      and from time to time clutching convulsively at his wounded side. His face
      expressed complete apathy. Only once when I roused him from his lethargy
      by some insignificant question he shifted his eyes over the pavement and
      the grey fence, and for a moment there was a gleam of gloomy anger in
      them.
    

      “‘Weelright,’” he read on a signboard. “Ignorant,
      illiterate people, devil take them!”
    

      I led him home from the cemetery.
    

                              ——


      Only one year has passed since that night, and Vassilyev has hardly had
      time to wear out the boots in which he tramped through the mud behind his
      wife’s coffin.
    

      At the present time as I finish this story, he is sitting in my
      drawing-room and, playing on the piano, is showing the ladies how
      provincial misses sing sentimental songs. The ladies are laughing, and he
      is laughing too. He is enjoying himself.
    

      I call him into my study. Evidently not pleased at my taking him from
      agreeable company, he comes to me and stands before me in the attitude of
      a man who has no time to spare. I give him this story, and ask him to read
      it. Always condescending about my authorship, he stifles a sigh, the sigh
      of a lazy reader, sits down in an armchair and begins upon it.
    

      “Hang it all, what horrors,” he mutters with a smile.
    

      But the further he gets into the reading, the graver his face becomes. At
      last, under the stress of painful memories, he turns terribly pale, he
      gets up and goes on reading as he stands. When he has finished he begins
      pacing from corner to corner.
    

      “How does it end?” I ask him.
    

      “How does it end? H’m. . . .”
    

      He looks at the room, at me, at himself. . . . He sees his new fashionable
      suit, hears the ladies laughing and . . . sinking on a chair, begins
      laughing as he laughed on that night.
    

      “Wasn’t I right when I told you it was all absurd? My God! I
      have had burdens to bear that would have broken an elephant’s back;
      the devil knows what I have suffered—no one could have suffered
      more, I think, and where are the traces? It’s astonishing. One would
      have thought the imprint made on a man by his agonies would have been
      everlasting, never to be effaced or eradicated. And yet that imprint wears
      out as easily as a pair of cheap boots. There is nothing left, not a
      scrap. It’s as though I hadn’t been suffering then, but had
      been dancing a mazurka. Everything in the world is transitory, and that
      transitoriness is absurd! A wide field for humorists! Tack on a humorous
      end, my friend!”
    

      “Pyotr Nikolaevitch, are you coming soon?” The impatient
      ladies call my hero.
    

      “This minute,” answers the “vain and fatuous” man,
      setting his tie straight. “It’s absurd and pitiful, my friend,
      pitiful and absurd, but what’s to be done? Homo sum. . . .
      And I praise Mother Nature all the same for her transmutation of
      substances. If we retained an agonising memory of toothache and of all the
      terrors which every one of us has had to experience, if all that were
      everlasting, we poor mortals would have a bad time of it in this life.”
    

      I look at his smiling face and I remember the despair and the horror with
      which his eyes were filled a year ago when he looked at the dark window. I
      see him, entering into his habitual rÃ´le of intellectual chatterer,
      prepare to show off his idle theories, such as the transmutation of
      substances before me, and at the same time I recall him sitting on the
      floor in a pool of blood with his sick imploring eyes.
    

      “How will it end?” I ask myself aloud.
    

      Vassilyev, whistling and straightening his tie, walks off into the
      drawing-room, and I look after him, and feel vexed. For some reason I
      regret his past sufferings, I regret all that I felt myself on that man’s
      account on that terrible night. It is as though I had lost something. . .
      .
    











      MARI D’ELLE
    

IT was a free
      night. Natalya Andreyevna Bronin (her married name was Nikitin), the opera
      singer, is lying in her bedroom, her whole being abandoned to repose. She
      lies, deliciously drowsy, thinking of her little daughter who lives
      somewhere far away with her grandmother or aunt. . . . The child is more
      precious to her than the public, bouquets, notices in the papers, adorers
      . . . and she would be glad to think about her till morning. She is happy,
      at peace, and all she longs for is not to be prevented from lying
      undisturbed, dozing and dreaming of her little girl.
    

      All at once the singer starts, and opens her eyes wide: there is a harsh
      abrupt ring in the entry. Before ten seconds have passed the bell tinkles
      a second time and a third time. The door is opened noisily and some one
      walks into the entry stamping his feet like a horse, snorting and puffing
      with the cold.
    

      “Damn it all, nowhere to hang one’s coat!” the singer
      hears a husky bass voice. “Celebrated singer, look at that! Makes
      five thousand a year, and can’t get a decent hat-stand!”
    

      “My husband!” thinks the singer, frowning. “And I
      believe he has brought one of his friends to stay the night too. . . .
      Hateful!”
    

      No more peace. When the loud noise of some one blowing his nose and
      putting off his goloshes dies away, the singer hears cautious footsteps in
      her bedroom. . . . It is her husband, mari d’elle, Denis
      Petrovitch Nikitin. He brings a whiff of cold air and a smell of brandy.
      For a long while he walks about the bedroom, breathing heavily, and,
      stumbling against the chairs in the dark, seems to be looking for
      something. . . .
    

      “What do you want?” his wife moans, when she is sick of his
      fussing about. “You have woken me.”
    

      “I am looking for the matches, my love. You . . . you are not asleep
      then? I have brought you a message. . . . Greetings from that . . . what’s-his-name?
      . . . red-headed fellow who is always sending you bouquets. . . .
      Zagvozdkin. . . . I have just been to see him.”
    

      “What did you go to him for?”
    

      “Oh, nothing particular. . . . We sat and talked and had a drink.
      Say what you like, Nathalie, I dislike that individual—I dislike him
      awfully! He is a rare blockhead. He is a wealthy man, a capitalist; he has
      six hundred thousand, and you would never guess it. Money is no more use
      to him than a radish to a dog. He does not eat it himself nor give it to
      others. Money ought to circulate, but he keeps tight hold of it, is afraid
      to part with it. . . . What’s the good of capital lying idle?
      Capital lying idle is no better than grass.”
    

Mari d’elle gropes his way to the edge of the bed and,
      puffing, sits down at his wife’s feet.
    

      “Capital lying idle is pernicious,” he goes on. “Why has
      business gone downhill in Russia? Because there is so much capital lying
      idle among us; they are afraid to invest it. It’s very different in
      England. . . . There are no such queer fish as Zagvozdkin in England, my
      girl. . . . There every farthing is in circulation . . . . Yes. . . . They
      don’t keep it locked up in chests there . . . .”
    

      “Well, that’s all right. I am sleepy.”
    

      “Directly. . . . Whatever was it I was talking about? Yes. . . . In
      these hard times hanging is too good for Zagvozdkin. . . . He is a fool
      and a scoundrel. . . . No better than a fool. If I asked him for a loan
      without security—why, a child could see that he runs no risk
      whatever. He doesn’t understand, the ass! For ten thousand he would
      have got a hundred. In a year he would have another hundred thousand. I
      asked, I talked . . . but he wouldn’t give it me, the blockhead.”
    

      “I hope you did not ask him for a loan in my name.”
    

      “H’m. . . . A queer question. . . .” Mari d’elle
      is offended. “Anyway he would sooner give me ten thousand than you.
      You are a woman, and I am a man anyway, a business-like person. And what a
      scheme I propose to him! Not a bubble, not some chimera, but a sound
      thing, substantial! If one could hit on a man who would understand, one
      might get twenty thousand for the idea alone! Even you would understand if
      I were to tell you about it. Only you . . . don’t chatter about it .
      . . not a word . . . but I fancy I have talked to you about it already.
      Have I talked to you about sausage-skins?”
    

      “M’m . . . by and by.”
    

      “I believe I have. . . . Do you see the point of it? Now the
      provision shops and the sausage-makers get their sausage-skins locally,
      and pay a high price for them. Well, but if one were to bring
      sausage-skins from the Caucasus where they are worth nothing, and where
      they are thrown away, then . . . where do you suppose the sausage-makers
      would buy their skins, here in the slaughterhouses or from me? From me, of
      course! Why, I shall sell them ten times as cheap! Now let us look at it
      like this: every year in Petersburg and Moscow and in other centres these
      same skins would be bought to the . . . to the sum of five hundred
      thousand, let us suppose. That’s the minimum. Well, and if. . . .”
    

      “You can tell me to-morrow . . . later on. . . .”
    

      “Yes, that’s true. You are sleepy, pardon, I am just
      going . . . say what you like, but with capital you can do good business
      everywhere, wherever you go. . . . With capital even out of cigarette ends
      one may make a million. . . . Take your theatrical business now. Why, for
      example, did Lentovsky come to grief? It’s very simple. He did not
      go the right way to work from the very first. He had no capital and he
      went headlong to the dogs. . . . He ought first to have secured his
      capital, and then to have gone slowly and cautiously . . . . Nowadays, one
      can easily make money by a theatre, whether it is a private one or a
      people’s one. . . . If one produces the right plays, charges a low
      price for admission, and hits the public fancy, one may put a hundred
      thousand in one’s pocket the first year. . . . You don’t
      understand, but I am talking sense. . . . You see you are fond of hoarding
      capital; you are no better than that fool Zagvozdkin, you heap it up and
      don’t know what for. . . . You won’t listen, you don’t
      want to. . . . If you were to put it into circulation, you wouldn’t
      have to be rushing all over the place . . . . You see for a private
      theatre, five thousand would be enough for a beginning. . . . Not like
      Lentovsky, of course, but on a modest scale in a small way. I have got a
      manager already, I have looked at a suitable building. . . . It’s
      only the money I haven’t got. . . . If only you understood things
      you would have parted with your Five per cents . . . your Preference
      shares. . . .”
    

      “No, merci. . . . You have fleeced me enough already. . . .
      Let me alone, I have been punished already. . . .”
    

      “If you are going to argue like a woman, then of course . . .”
      sighs Nikitin, getting up. “Of course. . . .”
    

      “Let me alone. . . . Come, go away and don’t keep me awake. .
      . . I am sick of listening to your nonsense.”
    

      “H’m. . . . To be sure . . . of course! Fleeced. . .
      plundered. . . . What we give we remember, but we don’t remember
      what we take.”
    

      “I have never taken anything from you.”
    

      “Is that so? But when we weren’t a celebrated singer, at whose
      expense did we live then? And who, allow me to ask, lifted you out of
      beggary and secured your happiness? Don’t you remember that?”
    

      “Come, go to bed. Go along and sleep it off.”
    

      “Do you mean to say you think I am drunk? . . . if I am so low in
      the eyes of such a grand lady. . . I can go away altogether.”
    

      “Do. A good thing too.”
    

      “I will, too. I have humbled myself enough. And I will go.”
    

      “Oh, my God! Oh, do go, then! I shall be delighted!”
    

      “Very well, we shall see.”
    

      Nikitin mutters something to himself, and, stumbling over the chairs, goes
      out of the bedroom. Then sounds reach her from the entry of whispering,
      the shuffling of goloshes and a door being shut. Mari d’elle
      has taken offence in earnest and gone out.
    

      “Thank God, he has gone!” thinks the singer. “Now I can
      sleep.”
    

      And as she falls asleep she thinks of her mari d’elle, “what
      sort of a man he is, and how this affliction has come upon her. At one
      time he used to live at Tchernigov, and had a situation there as a
      book-keeper. As an ordinary obscure individual and not the mari d’elle,
      he had been quite endurable: he used to go to his work and take his
      salary, and all his whims and projects went no further than a new guitar,
      fashionable trousers, and an amber cigarette-holder. Since he had become
      “the husband of a celebrity” he was completely transformed.
      The singer remembered that when first she told him she was going on the
      stage he had made a fuss, been indignant, complained to her parents,
      turned her out of the house. She had been obliged to go on the stage
      without his permission. Afterwards, when he learned from the papers and
      from various people that she was earning big sums, he had ‘forgiven
      her,’ abandoned book-keeping, and become her hanger-on. The singer
      was overcome with amazement when she looked at her hanger-on: when and
      where had he managed to pick up new tastes, polish, and airs and graces?
      Where had he learned the taste of oysters and of different Burgundies? Who
      had taught him to dress and do his hair in the fashion and call her
      ‘Nathalie’ instead of Natasha?”
    

      “It’s strange,” thinks the singer. “In old days he
      used to get his salary and put it away, but now a hundred roubles a day is
      not enough for him. In old days he was afraid to talk before schoolboys
      for fear of saying something silly, and now he is overfamiliar even with
      princes . . . wretched, contemptible little creature!”
    

      But then the singer starts again; again there is the clang of the bell in
      the entry. The housemaid, scolding and angrily flopping with her slippers,
      goes to open the door. Again some one comes in and stamps like a horse.
    

      “He has come back!” thinks the singer. “When shall I be
      left in peace? It’s revolting!” She is overcome by fury.
    

      “Wait a bit. . . . I’ll teach you to get up these farces! You
      shall go away. I’ll make you go away!”
    

      The singer leaps up and runs barefoot into the little drawing-room where
      her mari usually sleeps. She comes at the moment when he is
      undressing, and carefully folding his clothes on a chair.
    

      “You went away!” she says, looking at him with bright eyes
      full of hatred. “What did you come back for?”
    

      Nikitin remains silent, and merely sniffs.
    

      “You went away! Kindly take yourself off this very minute! This very
      minute! Do you hear?”
    

Mari d’elle coughs and, without looking at his wife, takes
      off his braces.
    

      “If you don’t go away, you insolent creature, I shall go,”
      the singer goes on, stamping her bare foot, and looking at him with
      flashing eyes. “I shall go! Do you hear, insolent . . . worthless
      wretch, flunkey, out you go!”
    

      “You might have some shame before outsiders,” mutters her
      husband . . . .
    

      The singer looks round and only then sees an unfamiliar countenance that
      looks like an actor’s. . . . The countenance, seeing the singer’s
      uncovered shoulders and bare feet, shows signs of embarrassment, and looks
      ready to sink through the floor.
    

      “Let me introduce . . .” mutters Nikitin, “Bezbozhnikov,
      a provincial manager.”
    

      The singer utters a shriek, and runs off into her bedroom.
    

      “There, you see . . .” says mari d’elle, as he
      stretches himself on the sofa, “it was all honey just now . . . my
      love, my dear, my darling, kisses and embraces . . . but as soon as money
      is touched upon, then. . . . As you see . . . money is the great thing. .
      . . Good night!”
    

      A minute later there is a snore.
    











      A LIVING CHATTEL
    

GROHOLSKY embraced
      Liza, kept kissing one after another all her little fingers with their
      bitten pink nails, and laid her on the couch covered with cheap velvet.
      Liza crossed one foot over the other, clasped her hands behind her head,
      and lay down.
    

      Groholsky sat down in a chair beside her and bent over. He was entirely
      absorbed in contemplation of her.
    

      How pretty she seemed to him, lighted up by the rays of the setting sun!
    

      There was a complete view from the window of the setting sun, golden,
      lightly flecked with purple.
    

      The whole drawing-room, including Liza, was bathed by it with brilliant
      light that did not hurt the eyes, and for a little while covered with
      gold.
    

      Groholsky was lost in admiration. Liza was so incredibly beautiful. It is
      true her little kittenish face with its brown eyes, and turn up nose was
      fresh, and even piquant, his scanty hair was black as soot and curly, her
      little figure was graceful, well proportioned and mobile as the body of an
      electric eel, but on the whole. . . . However my taste has nothing to do
      with it. Groholsky who was spoilt by women, and who had been in love and
      out of love hundreds of times in his life, saw her as a beauty. He loved
      her, and blind love finds ideal beauty everywhere.
    

      “I say,” he said, looking straight into her eyes, “I
      have come to talk to you, my precious. Love cannot bear anything vague or
      indefinite. . . . Indefinite relations, you know, I told you yesterday,
      Liza . . . we will try to-day to settle the question we raised yesterday.
      Come, let us decide together. . . .”
    

      “What are we to do?”
    

      Liza gave a yawn and scowling, drew her right arm from under her head.
    

      “What are we to do?” she repeated hardly audibly after
      Groholsky.
    

      “Well, yes, what are we to do? Come, decide, wise little head . . .
      I love you, and a man in love is not fond of sharing. He is more than an
      egoist. It is too much for me to go shares with your husband. I mentally
      tear him to pieces, when I remember that he loves you too. In the second
      place you love me. . . . Perfect freedom is an essential condition for
      love. . . . And are you free? Are you not tortured by the thought that
      that man towers for ever over your soul? A man whom you do not love, whom
      very likely and quite naturally, you hate. . . . That’s the second
      thing. . . . And thirdly. . . . What is the third thing? Oh yes. . . . We
      are deceiving him and that . . . is dishonourable. Truth before
      everything, Liza. Let us have done with lying!”
    

      “Well, then, what are we to do?”
    

      “You can guess. . . . I think it necessary, obligatory, to inform
      him of our relations and to leave him, to begin to live in freedom. Both
      must be done as quickly as possible. . . . This very evening, for
      instance. . . . It’s time to make an end of it. Surely you must be
      sick of loving like a thief?”
    

      “Tell! tell Vanya?”
    

      “Why, yes!”
    

      “That’s impossible! I told you yesterday, Michel, that it is
      impossible.”
    

      “Why?”
    

      “He will be upset. He’ll make a row, do all sorts of
      unpleasant things. . . . Don’t you know what he is like? God forbid!
      There’s no need to tell him. What an idea!”
    

      Groholsky passed his hand over his brow, and heaved a sigh.
    

      “Yes,” he said, “he will be more than upset. I am
      robbing him of his happiness. Does he love you?”
    

      “He does love me. Very much.”
    

      “There’s another complication! One does not know where to
      begin. To conceal it from him is base, telling him would kill him. . . .
      Goodness knows what’s one to do. Well, how is it to be?”
    

      Groholsky pondered. His pale face wore a frown.
    

      “Let us go on always as we are now,” said Liza. “Let him
      find out for himself, if he wants to.”
    

      “But you know that . . . is sinful, and besides the fact is you are
      mine, and no one has the right to think that you do not belong to me but
      to someone else! You are mine! I will not give way to anyone! . . . I am
      sorry for him—God knows how sorry I am for him, Liza! It hurts me to
      see him! But . . . it can’t be helped after all. You don’t
      love him, do you? What’s the good of your going on being miserable
      with him? We must have it out! We will have it out with him, and you will
      come to me. You are my wife, and not his. Let him do what he likes. He’ll
      get over his troubles somehow. . . . He is not the first, and he won’t
      be the last. . . . Will you run away? Eh? Make haste and tell me! Will you
      run away?”
    

      Liza got up and looked inquiringly at Groholsky.
    

      “Run away?”
    

      “Yes. . . . To my estate. . . . Then to the Crimea. . . . We will
      tell him by letter. . . . We can go at night. There is a train at half
      past one. Well? Is that all right?”
    

      Liza scratched the bridge of her nose, and hesitated.
    

      “Very well,” she said, and burst into tears.
    

      Patches of red came out of her cheeks, her eyes swelled, and tears flowed
      down her kittenish face. . . .
    

      “What is it?” cried Groholsky in a flutter. “Liza! what’s
      the matter? Come! what are you crying for? What a girl! Come, what is it?
      Darling! Little woman!”
    

      Liza held out her hands to Groholsky, and hung on his neck. There was a
      sound of sobbing.
    

      “I am sorry for him . . .” muttered Liza. “Oh, I am so
      sorry for him!”
    

      “Sorry for whom?”
    

      “Va—Vanya. . . .”
    

      “And do you suppose I’m not? But what’s to be done? We
      are causing him suffering. . . . He will be unhappy, will curse us . . .
      but is it our fault that we love one another?”
    

      As he uttered the last word, Groholsky darted away from Liza as though he
      had been stung and sat down in an easy chair. Liza sprang away from his
      neck and rapidly—in one instant—dropped on the lounge.
    

      They both turned fearfully red, dropped their eyes, and coughed.
    

      A tall, broad-shouldered man of thirty, in the uniform of a government
      clerk, had walked into the drawing-room. He had walked in unnoticed. Only
      the bang of a chair which he knocked in the doorway had warned the lovers
      of his presence, and made them look round. It was the husband.
    

      They had looked round too late.
    

      He had seen Groholsky’s arm round Liza’s waist, and had seen
      Liza hanging on Groholsky’s white and aristocratic neck.
    

      “He saw us!” Liza and Groholsky thought at the same moment,
      while they did not know what to do with their heavy hands and embarrassed
      eyes. . . .
    

      The petrified husband, rosy-faced, turned white.
    

      An agonising, strange, soul-revolting silence lasted for three minutes.
      Oh, those three minutes! Groholsky remembers them to this day.
    

      The first to move and break the silence was the husband. He stepped up to
      Groholsky and, screwing his face into a senseless grimace like a smile,
      gave him his hand. Groholsky shook the soft perspiring hand and shuddered
      all over as though he had crushed a cold frog in his fist.
    

      “Good evening,” he muttered.
    

      “How are you?” the husband brought out in a faint husky,
      almost inaudible voice, and he sat down opposite Groholsky, straightening
      his collar at the back of his neck.
    

      Again, an agonising silence followed . . . but that silence was no longer
      so stupid. . . . The first step, most difficult and colourless, was over.
    

      All that was left now was for one of the two to depart in search of
      matches or on some such trifling errand. Both longed intensely to get
      away. They sat still, not looking at one another, and pulled at their
      beards while they ransacked their troubled brains for some means of escape
      from their horribly awkward position. Both were perspiring. Both were
      unbearably miserable and both were devoured by hatred. They longed to
      begin the tussle but how were they to begin and which was to begin first?
      If only she would have gone out!
    

      “I saw you yesterday at the Assembly Hall,” muttered Bugrov
      (that was the husband’s name).
    

      “Yes, I was there . . . the ball . . . did you dance?”
    

      “M’m . . . yes . . . with that . . . with the younger
      Lyukovtsky . . . . She dances heavily. . . . She dances impossibly. She is
      a great chatterbox.” (Pause.) “She is never tired of talking.”
    

      “Yes. . . . It was slow. I saw you too. . .”
    

      Groholsky accidentally glanced at Bugrov. . . . He caught the shifting
      eyes of the deceived husband and could not bear it. He got up quickly,
      quickly seized Bugrov’s hand, shook it, picked up his hat, and
      walked towards the door, conscious of his own back. He felt as though
      thousands of eyes were looking at his back. It is a feeling known to the
      actor who has been hissed and is making his exit from the stage, and to
      the young dandy who has received a blow on the back of the head and is
      being led away in charge of a policeman.
    

      As soon as the sound of Groholsky’s steps had died away and the door
      in the hall creaked, Bugrov leapt up, and after making two or three rounds
      of the drawing-room, strolled up to his wife. The kittenish face puckered
      up and began bKlinking its eyes as though expecting a slap. Her husband
      went up to her, and with a pale, distorted face, with arms, head, and
      shoulders shaking, stepped on her dress and knocked her knees with his.
    

      “If, you wretched creature,” he began in a hollow, wailing
      voice, “you let him come here once again, I’ll. . . . Don’t
      let him dare to set his foot. . . . I’ll kill you. Do you
      understand? A-a-ah . . . worthless creature, you shudder! Fil-thy woman!”
    

      Bugrov seized her by the elbow, shook her, and flung her like an
      indiarubber ball towards the window. . . .
    

      “Wretched, vulgar woman! you have no shame!”
    

      She flew towards the window, hardly touching the floor with her feet, and
      caught at the curtains with her hands.
    

      “Hold your tongue,” shouted her husband, going up to her with
      flashing eyes and stamping his foot.
    

      She did hold her tongue, she looked at the ceiling, and whimpered while
      her face wore the expression of a little girl in disgrace expecting to be
      punished.
    

      “So that’s what you are like! Eh? Carrying on with a fop!
      Good! And your promise before the altar? What are you? A nice wife and
      mother. Hold your tongue!”
    

      And he struck her on her pretty supple shoulder. “Hold your tongue,
      you wretched creature. I’ll give you worse than that! If that
      scoundrel dares to show himself here ever again, if I see you—listen!—with
      that blackguard ever again, don’t ask for mercy! I’ll kill
      you, if I go to Siberia for it! And him too. I shouldn’t think twice
      about it! You can go, I don’t want to see you!”
    

      Bugrov wiped his eyes and his brow with his sleeve and strode about the
      drawing-room, Liza sobbing more and more loudly, twitching her shoulders
      and her little turned up nose, became absorbed in examining the lace on
      the curtain.
    

      “You are crazy,” her husband shouted. “Your silly head
      is full of nonsense! Nothing but whims! I won’t allow it, Elizaveta,
      my girl! You had better be careful with me! I don’t like it! If you
      want to behave like a pig, then . . . then out you go, there is no place
      in my house for you! Out you pack if. . . . You are a wife, so you must
      forget these dandies, put them out of your silly head! It’s all
      foolishness! Don’t let it happen again! You try defending yourself!
      Love your husband! You have been given to your husband, so you must love
      him. Yes, indeed! Is one not enough? Go away till . . . . Torturers!”
    

      Bugrov paused; then shouted:
    

      “Go away I tell you, go to the nursery! Why are you blubbering, it
      is your own fault, and you blubber! What a woman! Last year you were after
      Petka Totchkov, now you are after this devil. Lord forgive us! . . . Tfoo,
      it’s time you understood what you are! A wife! A mother! Last year
      there were unpleasantnesses, and now there will be unpleasantnesses. . . .
      Tfoo!”
    

      Bugrov heaved a loud sigh, and the air was filled with the smell of
      sherry. He had come back from dining and was slightly drunk . . . .
    

      “Don’t you know your duty? No! . . . you must be taught, you’ve
      not been taught so far! Your mamma was a gad-about, and you . . . you can
      blubber. Yes! blubber away. . . .”
    

      Bugrov went up to his wife and drew the curtain out of her hands.
    

      “Don’t stand by the window, people will see you blubbering. .
      . . Don’t let it happen again. You’ll go from embracing to
      worse trouble. You’ll come to grief. Do you suppose I like to be
      made a fool of? And you will make a fool of me if you carry on with them,
      the low brutes. . . . Come, that’s enough. . . . Don’t you. .
      . . Another time. . . . Of course I . . Liza . . . stay. . . .”
    

      Bugrov heaved a sigh and enveloped Liza in the fumes of sherry.
    

      “You are young and silly, you don’t understand anything. . . .
      I am never at home. . . . And they take advantage of it. You must be
      sensible, prudent. They will deceive you. And then I won’t endure
      it. . . . Then I may do anything. . . . Of course! Then you can just lie
      down, and die. I . . . I am capable of doing anything if you deceive me,
      my good girl. I might beat you to death. . . . And . . . I shall turn you
      out of the house, and then you can go to your rascals.”
    

      And Bugrov (horribile dictu) wiped the wet, tearful face of the
      traitress Liza with his big soft hand. He treated his twenty-year-old wife
      as though she were a child.
    

      “Come, that’s enough. . . . I forgive you. Only God forbid it
      should happen again! I forgive you for the fifth time, but I shall not
      forgive you for the sixth, as God is holy. God does not forgive such as
      you for such things.”
    

      Bugrov bent down and put out his shining lips towards Liza’s little
      head. But the kiss did not follow. The doors of the hall, of the
      dining-room, of the parlour, and of the drawing-room all slammed, and
      Groholsky flew into the drawing-room like a whirlwind. He was pale and
      trembling. He was flourishing his arms and crushing his expensive hat in
      his hands. His coat fluttered upon him as though it were on a peg. He was
      the incarnation of acute fever. When Bugrov saw him he moved away from his
      wife and began looking out of the other window. Groholsky flew up to him,
      and waving his arms and breathing heavily and looking at no one, he began
      in a shaking voice:
    

      “Ivan Petrovitch! Let us leave off keeping up this farce with one
      another! We have deceived each other long enough! It’s too much! I
      cannot stand it. You must do as you like, but I cannot! It’s hateful
      and mean, it’s revolting! Do you understand that it is revolting?”
    

      Groholsky spluttered and gasped for breath.
    

      “It’s against my principles. And you are an honest man. I love
      her! I love her more than anything on earth! You have noticed it and . . .
      it’s my duty to say this!”
    

      “What am I to say to him?” Ivan Petrovitch wondered.
    

      “We must make an end of it. This farce cannot drag on much longer!
      It must be settled somehow.”
    

      Groholsky drew a breath and went on:
    

      “I cannot live without her; she feels the same. You are an educated
      man, you will understand that in such circumstances your family life is
      impossible. This woman is not yours, so . . . in short, I beg you to look
      at the matter from an indulgent humane point of view. . . . Ivan
      Petrovitch, you must understand at last that I love her—love her
      more than myself, more than anything in the world, and to struggle against
      that love is beyond my power!”
    

      “And she?” Bugrov asked in a sullen, somewhat ironical tone.
    

      “Ask her; come now, ask her! For her to live with a man she does not
      love, to live with you is . . . is a misery!”
    

      “And she?” Bugrov repeated, this time not in an ironical tone.
    

      “She . . . she loves me! We love each other, Ivan Petrovitch! Kill
      us, despise us, pursue us, do as you will, but we can no longer conceal it
      from you. We are standing face to face—you may judge us with all the
      severity of a man whom we . . . whom fate has robbed of happiness!”
    

      Bugrov turned as red as a boiled crab, and looked out of one eye at Liza.
      He began bKlinking. His fingers, his lips, and his eyelids twitched. Poor
      fellow! The eyes of his weeping wife told him that Groholsky was right,
      that it was a serious matter.
    

      “Well!” he muttered. “If you. . . . In these days. . . .
      You are always. . . .”
    

      “As God is above,” Groholsky shrilled in his high tenor,
      “we understand you. Do you suppose we have no sense, no feeling? I
      know what agonies I am causing you, as God’s above! But be
      indulgent, I beseech you! We are not to blame. Love is not a crime. No
      will can struggle against it. . . . Give her up to me, Ivan Petrovitch!
      Let her go with me! Take from me what you will for your sufferings. Take
      my life, but give me Liza. I am ready to do anything. . . . Come, tell me
      how I can do something to make up in part at least! To make up for that
      lost happiness, I can give you other happiness. I can, Ivan Petrovitch; I
      am ready to do anything! It would be base on my part to leave you without
      satisfaction. . . . I understand you at this moment.”
    

      Bugrov waved his hand as though to say, ‘For God’s sake, go
      away.’ His eyes began to be dimmed by a treacherous moisture—in
      a moment they would see him crying like a child.
    

      “I understand you, Ivan Petrovitch. I will give you another
      happiness, such as hitherto you have not known. What would you like? I
      have money, my father is an influential man. . . . Will you? Come, how
      much do you want?”
    

      Bugrov’s heart suddenly began throbbing. . . . He clutched at the
      window curtains with both hands. . . .
    

      “Will you have fifty thousand? Ivan Petrovitch, I entreat you. . . .
      It’s not a bribe, not a bargain. . . . I only want by a sacrifice on
      my part to atone a little for your inevitable loss. Would you like a
      hundred thousand? I am willing. A hundred thousand?”
    

      My God! Two immense hammers began beating on the perspiring temples of the
      unhappy Ivan Petrovitch. Russian sledges with tinkling bells began racing
      in his ears. . . .
    

      “Accept this sacrifice from me,” Groholsky went on, “I
      entreat you! You will take a load off my conscience. . . . I implore you!”
    

      My God! A smart carriage rolled along the road wet from a May shower,
      passed the window through which Bugrov’s wet eyes were looking. The
      horses were fine, spirited, well-trained beasts. People in straw hats,
      with contented faces, were sitting in the carriage with long fishing-rods
      and bags. . . . A schoolboy in a white cap was holding a gun. They were
      driving out into the country to catch fish, to shoot, to walk about and
      have tea in the open air. They were driving to that region of bliss in
      which Bugrov as a boy—the barefoot, sunburnt, but infinitely happy
      son of a village deacon—had once raced about the meadows, the woods,
      and the river banks. Oh, how fiendishly seductive was that May! How happy
      those who can take off their heavy uniforms, get into a carriage and fly
      off to the country where the quails are calling and there is the scent of
      fresh hay. Bugrov’s heart ached with a sweet thrill that made him
      shiver. A hundred thousand! With the carriage there floated before him all
      the secret dreams over which he had gloated, through the long years of his
      life as a government clerk as he sat in the office of his department or in
      his wretched little study. . . . A river, deep, with fish, a wide garden
      with narrow avenues, little fountains, shade, flowers, arbours, a
      luxurious villa with terraces and turrets with an Aeolian harp and little
      silver bells (he had heard of the existence of an Aeolian harp from German
      romances); a cloudless blue sky; pure limpid air fragrant with the scents
      that recall his hungry, barefoot, crushed childhood. . . . To get up at
      five, to go to bed at nine; to spend the day catching fish, talking with
      the peasants. . . . What happiness!
    

      “Ivan Petrovitch, do not torture me! Will you take a hundred
      thousand?”
    

      “H’m . . . a hundred and fifty thousand!” muttered
      Bugrov in a hollow voice, the voice of a husky bull. He muttered it, and
      bowed his head, ashamed of his words, and awaiting the answer.
    

      “Good,” said Groholsky, “I agree. I thank you, Ivan
      Petrovitch . . . . In a minute. . . . I will not keep you waiting. . . .”
    

      Groholsky jumped up, put on his hat, and staggering backwards, ran out of
      the drawing-room.
    

      Bugrov clutched the window curtains more tightly than ever. . . . He was
      ashamed . . . . There was a nasty, stupid feeling in his soul, but, on the
      other hand, what fair shining hopes swarmed between his throbbing temples!
      He was rich!
    

      Liza, who had grasped nothing of what was happening, darted through the
      half-opened door trembling all over and afraid that he would come to her
      window and fling her away from it. She went into the nursery, laid herself
      down on the nurse’s bed, and curled herself up. She was shivering
      with fever.
    

      Bugrov was left alone. He felt stifled, and he opened the window. What
      glorious air breathed fragrance on his face and neck! It would be good to
      breathe such air lolling on the cushions of a carriage . . . . Out there,
      far beyond the town, among the villages and the summer villas, the air was
      sweeter still. . . . Bugrov actually smiled as he dreamed of the air that
      would be about him when he would go out on the verandah of his villa and
      admire the view. A long while he dreamed. . . . The sun had set, and still
      he stood and dreamed, trying his utmost to cast out of his mind the image
      of Liza which obstinately pursued him in all his dreams.
    

“I have brought it, Ivan Petrovitch!” Groholsky, re-entering,
whispered above his ear. “I have brought it—take it. . . . Here
in this roll there are forty thousand. . . . With this cheque will
you kindly get twenty the day after to-morrow from Valentinov? . . .
 Here is a bill of exchange . . . a cheque. . . . The remaining
thirty thousand in a day or two. . . . My steward will bring it to
you.”
 

      Groholsky, pink and excited, with all his limbs in motion, laid before
      Bugrov a heap of rolls of notes and bundles of papers. The heap was big,
      and of all sorts of hues and tints. Never in the course of his life had
      Bugrov seen such a heap. He spread out his fat fingers and, not looking at
      Groholsky, fell to going through the bundles of notes and bonds. . . .
    

      Groholsky spread out all the money, and moved restlessly about the room,
      looking for the Dulcinea who had been bought and sold.
    

      Filling his pockets and his pocket-book, Bugrov thrust the securities into
      the table drawer, and, drinking off half a decanter full of water, dashed
      out into the street.
    

      “Cab!” he shouted in a frantic voice.
    

      At half-past eleven that night he drove up to the entrance of the Paris
      Hotel. He went noisily upstairs and knocked at the door of Groholsky’s
      apartments. He was admitted. Groholsky was packing his things in a
      portmanteau, Liza was sitting at the table trying on bracelets. They were
      both frightened when Bugrov went in to them. They fancied that he had come
      for Liza and had brought back the money which he had taken in haste
      without reflection. But Bugrov had not come for Liza. Ashamed of his new
      get-up and feeling frightfully awkward in it, he bowed and stood at the
      door in the attitude of a flunkey. The get-up was superb. Bugrov was
      unrecognisable. His huge person, which had never hitherto worn anything
      but a uniform, was clothed in a fresh, brand-new suit of fine French cloth
      and of the most fashionable cut. On his feet spats shone with sparkling
      buckles. He stood ashamed of his new get-up, and with his right hand
      covered the watch-chain for which he had, an hour before, paid three
      hundred roubles.
    

      “I have come about something,” he began. “A business
      agreement is beyond price. I am not going to give up Mishutka. . . .”
    

      “What Mishutka?” asked Groholsky.
    

      “My son.”
    

      Groholsky and Liza looked at each other. Liza’s eyes bulged, her
      cheeks flushed, and her lips twitched. . . .
    

      “Very well,” she said.
    

      She thought of Mishutka’s warm little cot. It would be cruel to
      exchange that warm little cot for a chilly sofa in the hotel, and she
      consented.
    

      “I shall see him,” she said.
    

      Bugrov bowed, walked out, and flew down the stairs in his splendour,
      cleaving the air with his expensive cane. . . .
    

      “Home,” he said to the cabman. “I am starting at five o’clock
      to-morrow morning. . . . You will come; if I am asleep, you will wake me.
      We are driving out of town.”
    

      II
    

      It was a lovely August evening. The sun, set in a golden background
      lightly flecked with purple, stood above the western horizon on the point
      of sinking behind the far-away tumuli. In the garden, shadows and
      half-shadows had vanished, and the air had grown damp, but the golden
      light was still playing on the tree-tops. . . . It was warm. . . . Rain
      had just fallen, and made the fresh, transparent fragrant air still
      fresher.
    

      I am not describing the August of Petersburg or Moscow, foggy, tearful,
      and dark, with its cold, incredibly damp sunsets. God forbid! I am not
      describing our cruel northern August. I ask the reader to move with me to
      the Crimea, to one of its shores, not far from Feodosia, the spot where
      stands the villa of one of our heroes. It is a pretty, neat villa
      surrounded by flower-beds and clipped bushes. A hundred paces behind it is
      an orchard in which its inmates walk. . . . Groholsky pays a high rent for
      that villa, a thousand roubles a year, I believe. . . . The villa is not
      worth that rent, but it is pretty. . . . Tall, with delicate walls and
      very delicate parapets, fragile, slender, painted a pale blue colour, hung
      with curtains, portiÃ¨res, draperies, it suggests a charming,
      fragile Chinese lady. . . .
    

      On the evening described above, Groholsky and Liza were sitting on the
      verandah of this villa. Groholsky was reading Novoye Vremya and
      drinking milk out of a green mug. A syphon of Seltzer water was standing
      on the table before him. Groholsky imagined that he was suffering from
      catarrh of the lungs, and by the advice of Dr. Dmitriev consumed an
      immense quantity of grapes, milk, and Seltzer water. Liza was sitting in a
      soft easy chair some distance from the table. With her elbows on the
      parapet, and her little face propped on her little fists, she was gazing
      at the villa opposite. . . . The sun was playing upon the windows of the
      villa opposite, the glittering panes reflected the dazzling light. . . .
      Beyond the little garden and the few trees that surrounded the villa there
      was a glimpse of the sea with its waves, its dark blue colour, its
      immensity, its white masts. . . . It was so delightful! Groholsky was
      reading an article by Anonymous, and after every dozen lines he raised his
      blue eyes to Liza’s back. . . . The same passionate, fervent love
      was shining in those eyes still. . . . He was infinitely happy in spite of
      his imaginary catarrh of the lungs. . . . Liza was conscious of his eyes
      upon her back, and was thinking of Mishutka’s brilliant future, and
      she felt so comfortable, so serene . . . .
    

      She was not so much interested by the sea, and the glittering reflection
      on the windows of the villa opposite as by the waggons which were trailing
      up to that villa one after another.
    

      The waggons were full of furniture and all sorts of domestic articles.
      Liza watched the trellis gates and big glass doors of the villa being
      opened and the men bustling about the furniture and wrangling incessantly.
      Big armchairs and a sofa covered with dark raspberry coloured velvet,
      tables for the hall, the drawing-room and the dining-room, a big double
      bed and a child’s cot were carried in by the glass doors; something
      big, wrapped up in sacking, was carried in too. A grand piano, thought
      Liza, and her heart throbbed.
    

      It was long since she had heard the piano, and she was so fond of it. They
      had not a single musical instrument in their villa. Groholsky and she were
      musicians only in soul, no more. There were a great many boxes and
      packages with the words: “with care” upon them carried in
      after the piano.
    

      They were boxes of looking-glasses and crockery. A gorgeous and luxurious
      carriage was dragged in, at the gate, and two white horses were led in
      looking like swans.
    

      “My goodness, what riches!” thought Liza, remembering her old
      pony which Groholsky, who did not care for riding, had bought her for a
      hundred roubles. Compared with those swan-like steeds, her pony seemed to
      her no better than a bug. Groholsky, who was afraid of riding fast, had
      purposely bought Liza a poor horse.
    

      “What wealth!” Liza thought and murmured as she gazed at the
      noisy carriers.
    

      The sun hid behind the tumuli, the air began to lose its dryness and
      limpidity, and still the furniture was being driven up and hauled into the
      house. At last it was so dark that Groholsky left off reading the
      newspaper while Liza still gazed and gazed.
    

      “Shouldn’t we light the lamp?” said Groholsky, afraid
      that a fly might drop into his milk and be swallowed in the darkness.
    

      “Liza! shouldn’t we light the lamp? Shall we sit in darkness,
      my angel?”
    

      Liza did not answer. She was interested in a chaise which had driven up to
      the villa opposite. . . . What a charming little mare was in that chaise.
      Of medium size, not large, but graceful. . . . A gentleman in a top hat
      was sitting in the chaise, a child about three, apparently a boy, was
      sitting on his knees waving his little hands. . . . He was waving his
      little hands and shouting with delight.
    

      Liza suddenly uttered a shriek, rose from her seat and lurched forward.
    

      “What is the matter?” asked Groholsky.
    

      “Nothing. . . I only . . . I fancied. . . .”
    

      The tall, broad-shouldered gentleman in the top hat jumped out of the
      chaise, lifted the boy down, and with a skip and a hop ran gaily in at the
      glass door. The door opened noisily and he vanished into the darkness of
      the villa apartments.
    

      Two smart footmen ran up to the horse in the chaise, and most respectfully
      led it to the gate. Soon the villa opposite was lighted up, and the
      clatter of plates, knives, and forks was audible. The gentleman in the top
      hat was having his supper, and judging by the duration of the clatter of
      crockery, his supper lasted long. Liza fancied she could smell chicken
      soup and roast duck. After supper discordant sounds of the piano floated
      across from the villa. In all probability the gentleman in the top hat was
      trying to amuse the child in some way, and allowing it to strum on it.
    

      Groholsky went up to Liza and put his arm round her waist.
    

      “What wonderful weather!” he said. “What air! Do you
      feel it? I am very happy, Liza, very happy indeed. My happiness is so
      great that I am really afraid of its destruction. The greatest things are
      usually destroyed, and do you know, Liza, in spite of all my happiness, I
      am not absolutely . . . at peace. . . . One haunting thought torments me .
      . . it torments me horribly. It gives me no peace by day or by night. . .
      .”
    

      “What thought?”
    

      “An awful thought, my love. I am tortured by the thought of your
      husband. I have been silent hitherto. I have feared to trouble your inner
      peace, but I cannot go on being silent. Where is he? What has happened to
      him? What has become of him with his money? It is awful! Every night I see
      his face, exhausted, suffering, imploring. . . . Why, only think, my angel—can
      the money he so generously accepted make up to him for you? He loved you
      very much, didn’t he?”
    

      “Very much!”
    

      “There you see! He has either taken to drink now, or . . . I am
      anxious about him! Ah, how anxious I am! Should we write to him, do you
      think? We ought to comfort him . . . a kind word, you know.”
    

      Groholsky heaved a deep sigh, shook his head, and sank into an easy chair
      exhausted by painful reflection. Leaning his head on his fists he fell to
      musing. Judging from his face, his musings were painful.
    

      “I am going to bed,” said Liza; “it’s time.”
    

      Liza went to her own room, undressed, and dived under the bedclothes. She
      used to go to bed at ten o’clock and get up at ten. She was fond of
      her comfort.
    

      She was soon in the arms of Morpheus. Throughout the whole night she had
      the most fascinating dreams. . . . She dreamed whole romances, novels,
      Arabian Nights. . . . The hero of all these dreams was the gentleman in
      the top hat, who had caused her to utter a shriek that evening.
    

      The gentleman in the top hat was carrying her off from Groholsky, was
      singing, was beating Groholsky and her, was flogging the boy under the
      window, was declaring his love, and driving her off in the chaise. . . .
      Oh, dreams! In one night, lying with one’s eyes shut, one may
      sometimes live through more than ten years of happiness . . . . That night
      Liza lived through a great variety of experiences, and very happy ones,
      even in spite of the beating.
    

      Waking up between six and seven, she flung on her clothes, hurriedly did
      her hair, and without even putting on her Tatar slippers with pointed
      toes, ran impulsively on to the verandah. Shading her eyes from the sun
      with one hand, and with the other holding up her slipping clothes, she
      gazed at the villa opposite. Her face beamed . . . . There could be no
      further doubt it was he.
    

      On the verandah in the villa opposite there was a table in front of the
      glass door. A tea service was shining and glistening on the table with a
      silver samovar at the head. Ivan Petrovitch was sitting at the table. He
      had in his hand a glass in a silver holder, and was drinking tea. He was
      drinking it with great relish. That fact could be deduced from the
      smacking of his lips, the sound of which reached Liza’s ears. He was
      wearing a brown dressing-gown with black flowers on it. Massive tassels
      fell down to the ground. It was the first time in her life Liza had seen
      her husband in a dressing-gown, and such an expensive-looking one.
    

      Mishutka was sitting on one of his knees, and hindering him from drinking
      his tea. The child jumped up and down and tried to clutch his papa’s
      shining lip. After every three or four sips the father bent down to his
      son and kissed him on the head. A grey cat with its tail in the air was
      rubbing itself against one of the table legs, and with a plaintive mew
      proclaiming its desire for food. Liza hid behind the verandah curtain, and
      fastened her eyes upon the members of her former family; her face was
      radiant with joy.
    

      “Misha!” she murmured, “Misha! Are you really here,
      Misha? The darling! And how he loves Vanya! Heavens!”
    

      And Liza went off into a giggle when Mishutka stirred his father’s
      tea with a spoon. “And how Vanya loves Misha! My darlings!”
    

      Liza’s heart throbbed, and her head went round with joy and
      happiness. She sank into an armchair and went on observing them, sitting
      down.
    

      “How did they come here?” she wondered as she sent airy kisses
      to Mishutka. “Who gave them the idea of coming here? Heavens! Can
      all that wealth belong to them? Can those swan-like horses that were led
      in at the gate belong to Ivan Petrovitch? Ah!”
    

      When he had finished his tea, Ivan Petrovitch went into the house. Ten
      minutes later, he appeared on the steps and Liza was astounded . . . . He,
      who in his youth only seven years ago had been called Vanushka and Vanka
      and had been ready to punch a man in the face and turn the house upside
      down over twenty kopecks, was dressed devilishly well. He had on a
      broad-brimmed straw hat, exquisite brilliant boots, a piquÃ© waistcoat. . .
      . Thousands of suns, big and little, glistened on his watch-chain. With
      much chic he held in his right hand his gloves and cane.
    

      And what swagger, what style there was in his heavy figure when, with a
      graceful motion of his hand, he bade the footman bring the horse round.
    

      He got into the chaise with dignity, and told the footmen standing round
      the chaise to give him Mishutka and the fishing tackle they had brought.
      Setting Mishutka beside him, and putting his left arm round him, he held
      the reins and drove off.
    

      “Ge-ee up!” shouted Mishutka.
    

      Liza, unaware of what she was doing, waved her handkerchief after them. If
      she had looked in the glass she would have been surprised at her flushed,
      laughing, and, at the same time, tear-stained face. She was vexed that she
      was not beside her gleeful boy, and that she could not for some reason
      shower kisses on him at once.
    

      For some reason! . . . Away with all your petty delicacies!
    

      “Grisha! Grisha!” Liza ran into Groholsky’s bedroom and
      set to work to wake him. “Get up, they have come! The darling!”
    

      “Who has come?” asked Groholsky, waking up.
    

      “Our people . . . Vanya and Misha, they have come, they are in the
      villa opposite. . . . I looked out, and there they were drinking tea. . .
      . And Misha too. . . . What a little angel our Misha has grown! If only
      you had seen him! Mother of God!”
    

      “Seen whom? Why, you are. . . . Who has come? Come where?”
    

      “Vanya and Misha. . . . I have been looking at the villa opposite,
      while they were sitting drinking tea. Misha can drink his tea by himself
      now. . . . Didn’t you see them moving in yesterday, it was they who
      arrived!”
    

      Groholsky rubbed his forehead and turned pale.
    

      “Arrived? Your husband?” he asked.
    

      “Why, yes.”
    

      “What for?”
    

      “Most likely he is going to live here. They don’t know we are
      here. If they did, they would have looked at our villa, but they drank
      their tea and took no notice.”
    

      “Where is he now? But for God’s sake do talk sense! Oh, where
      is he?”
    

      “He has gone fishing with Misha in the chaise. Did you see the
      horses yesterday? Those are their horses . . . Vanya’s . . . Vanya
      drives with them. Do you know what, Grisha? We will have Misha to stay
      with us. . . . We will, won’t we? He is such a pretty boy. Such an
      exquisite boy!”
    

      Groholsky pondered, while Liza went on talking and talking.
    

      “This is an unexpected meeting,” said Groholsky, after
      prolonged and, as usual, harrassing reflection. “Well, who could
      have expected that we should meet here? Well. . . There it is. . . . So be
      it. It seems that it is fated. I can imagine the awkwardness of his
      position when he meets us.”
    

      “Shall we have Misha to stay with us?”
    

      “Yes, we will. . . . It will be awkward meeting him. . . . Why, what
      can I say to him? What can I talk of? It will be awkward for him and
      awkward for me. . . . We ought not to meet. We will carry on
      communications, if necessary, through the servants. . . . My head does
      ache so, Lizotchka. My arms and legs too, I ache all over. Is my head
      feverish?”
    

      Liza put her hand on his forehead and found that his head was hot.
    

      “I had dreadful dreams all night . . . I shan’t get up to-day.
      I shall stay in bed . . . I must take some quinine. Send me my breakfast
      here, little woman.”
    

      Groholsky took quinine and lay in bed the whole day. He drank warm water,
      moaned, had the sheets and pillowcase changed, whimpered, and induced an
      agonising boredom in all surrounding him.
    

      He was insupportable when he imagined he had caught a chill. Liza had
      continually to interrupt her inquisitive observations and run from the
      verandah to his room. At dinner-time she had to put on mustard plasters.
      How boring all this would have been, O reader, if the villa opposite had
      not been at the service of my heroine! Liza watched that villa all day
      long and was gasping with happiness.
    

      At ten o’clock Ivan Petrovitch and Mishutka came back from fishing
      and had breakfast. At two o’clock they had dinner, and at four o’clock
      they drove off somewhere in a carriage. The white horses bore them away
      with the swiftness of lightning. At seven o’clock visitors came to
      see them—all of them men. They were playing cards on two tables in
      the verandah till midnight. One of the men played superbly on the piano.
      The visitors played, ate, drank, and laughed. Ivan Petrovitch guffawing
      loudly, told them an anecdote of Armenian life at the top of his voice, so
      that all the villas round could hear. It was very gay and Mishutka sat up
      with them till midnight.
    

      “Misha is merry, he is not crying,” thought Liza, “so he
      does not remember his mamma. So he has forgotten me!”
    

      And there was a horrible bitter feeling in Liza’s soul. She spent
      the whole night crying. She was fretted by her little conscience, and by
      vexation and misery, and the desire to talk to Mishutka and kiss him. . .
      . In the morning she got up with a headache and tear-stained eyes. Her
      tears Groholsky put down to his own account.
    

      “Do not weep, darling,” he said to her, “I am all right
      to-day, my chest is a little painful, but that is nothing.”
    

      While they were having tea, lunch was being served at the villa opposite.
      Ivan Petrovitch was looking at his plate, and seeing nothing but a morsel
      of goose dripping with fat.
    

      “I am very glad,” said Groholsky, looking askance at Bugrov,
      “very glad that his life is so tolerable! I hope that decent
      surroundings anyway may help to stifle his grief. Keep out of sight, Liza!
      They will see you . . . I am not disposed to talk to him just now . . .
      God be with him! Why trouble his peace?”
    

      But the dinner did not pass off so quietly. During dinner precisely that
      “awkward position” which Groholsky so dreaded occurred. Just
      when the partridges, Groholsky’s favorite dish, had been put on the
      table, Liza was suddenly overcome with confusion, and Groholsky began
      wiping his face with his dinner napkin. On the verandah of the villa
      opposite they saw Bugrov. He was standing with his arms leaning on the
      parapet, and staring straight at them, with his eyes starting out of his
      head.
    

      “Go in, Liza, go in,” Groholsky whispered. “I said we
      must have dinner indoors! What a girl you are, really. . . .”
    

      Bugrov stared and stared, and suddenly began shouting. Groholsky looked at
      him and saw a face full of astonishment. . . .
    

      “Is that you?” bawled Ivan Petrovitch, “you! Are you
      here too?”
    

      Groholsky passed his fingers from one shoulder to another, as though to
      say, “My chest is weak, and so I can’t shout across such a
      distance.” Liza’s heart began throbbing, and everything turned
      round before her eyes. Bugrov ran from his verandah, ran across the road,
      and a few seconds later was standing under the verandah on which Groholsky
      and Liza were dining. Alas for the partridges!
    

      “How are you?” he began, flushing crimson, and stuffing his
      big hands in his pockets. “Are you here? Are you here too?”
    

      “Yes, we are here too. . . .”
    

      “How did you get here?”
    

      “Why, how did you?”
    

      “I? It’s a long story, a regular romance, my good friend! But
      don’t put yourselves out—eat your dinner! I’ve been
      living, you know, ever since then . . . in the Oryol province. I rented an
      estate. A splendid estate! But do eat your dinner! I stayed there from the
      end of May, but now I have given it up. . . . It was cold there, and—well,
      the doctor advised me to go to the Crimea. . . .”
    

      “Are you ill, then?” inquired Groholsky.
    

      “Oh, well. . . . There always seems, as it were . . . something
      gurgling here. . . .”
    

      And at the word “here” Ivan Petrovitch passed his open hand
      from his neck down to the middle of his stomach.
    

      “So you are here too. . . . Yes . . . that’s very pleasant.
      Have you been here long?”
    

      “Since July.”
    

      “Oh, and you, Liza, how are you? Quite well?”
    

      “Quite well,” answered Liza, and was embarrassed.
    

      “You miss Mishutka, I’ll be bound. Eh? Well, he’s here
      with me. . . . I’ll send him over to you directly with Nikifor. This
      is very nice. Well, good-bye! I have to go off directly. . . . I made the
      acquaintance of Prince Ter-Haimazov yesterday; delightful man, though he
      is an Armenian. So he has a croquet party to-day; we are going to play
      croquet. . . . Good-bye! The carriage is waiting . . . .”
    

      Ivan Petrovitch whirled round, tossed his head, and, waving adieu to them,
      ran home.
    

      “Unhappy man,” said Groholsky, heaving a deep sigh as he
      watched him go off.
    

      “In what way is he unhappy?” asked Liza.
    

      “To see you and not have the right to call you his!”
    

      “Fool!” Liza was so bold to think. “Idiot!”
    

      Before evening Liza was hugging and kissing Mishutka. At first the boy
      howled, but when he was offered jam, he was all friendly smiles.
    

      For three days Groholsky and Liza did not see Bugrov. He had disappeared
      somewhere, and was only at home at night. On the fourth day he visited
      them again at dinner-time. He came in, shook hands with both of them, and
      sat down to the table. His face was serious.
    

      “I have come to you on business,” he said. “Read this.”
      And he handed Groholsky a letter. “Read it! Read it aloud!”
    

      Groholsky read as follows:
    

      “My beloved and consoling, never-forgotten son Ioann! I have
      received the respectful and loving letter in which you invite your aged
      father to the mild and salubrious Crimea, to breathe the fragrant air, and
      behold strange lands. To that letter I reply that on taking my holiday, I
      will come to you, but not for long. My colleague, Father Gerasim, is a
      frail and delicate man, and cannot be left alone for long. I am very
      sensible of your not forgetting your parents, your father and your mother.
      . . . You rejoice your father with your affection, and you remember your
      mother in your prayers, and so it is fitting to do. Meet me at Feodosia.
      What sort of town is Feodosia—what is it like? It will be very
      agreeable to see it. Your godmother, who took you from the font, is called
      Feodosia. You write that God has been graciously pleased that you should
      win two hundred thousand roubles. That is gratifying to me. But I cannot
      approve of your having left the service while still of a grade of little
      importance; even a rich man ought to be in the service. I bless you
      always, now and hereafter. Ilya and Seryozhka Andronov send you their
      greetings. You might send them ten roubles each—they are badly off!
    

                                       “Your loving Father,

                                       “Pyotr Bugrov, Priest.”
 

      Groholsky read this letter aloud, and he and Liza both looked inquiringly
      at Bugrov.
    

      “You see what it is,” Ivan Petrovitch began hesitatingly.
      “I should like to ask you, Liza, not to let him see you, to keep out
      of his sight while he is here. I have written to him that you are ill and
      gone to the Caucasus for a cure. If you meet him. . . You see yourself. .
      . . It’s awkward. . . H’m. . . .”
    

      “Very well,” said Liza.
    

      “We can do that,” thought Groholsky, “since he makes
      sacrifices, why shouldn’t we?”
    

      “Please do. . . . If he sees you there will be trouble. . . . My
      father is a man of strict principles. He would curse me in seven churches.
      Don’t go out of doors, Liza, that is all. He won’t be here
      long. Don’t be afraid.”
    

      Father Pyotr did not long keep them waiting. One fine morning Ivan
      Petrovitch ran in and hissed in a mysterious tone:
    

      “He has come! He is asleep now, so please be careful.”
    

      And Liza was shut up within four walls. She did not venture to go out into
      the yard or on to the verandah. She could only see the sky from behind the
      window curtain. Unluckily for her, Ivan Petrovitch’s papa spent his
      whole time in the open air, and even slept on the verandah. Usually Father
      Pyotr, a little parish priest, in a brown cassock and a top hat with a
      curly brim, walked slowly round the villas and gazed with curiosity at the
      “strange lands” through his grandfatherly spectacles. Ivan
      Petrovitch with the Stanislav on a little ribbon accompanied him. He did
      not wear a decoration as a rule, but before his own people he liked to
      show off. In their society he always wore the Stanislav.
    

      Liza was bored to death. Groholsky suffered too. He had to go for his
      walks alone without a companion. He almost shed tears, but . . . had to
      submit to his fate. And to make things worse, Bugrov would run across
      every morning and in a hissing whisper would give some quite unnecessary
      bulletin concerning the health of Father Pyotr. He bored them with those
      bulletins.
    

      “He slept well,” he informed them. “Yesterday he was put
      out because I had no salted cucumbers. . . He has taken to Mishutka; he
      keeps patting him on the head.”
    

      At last, a fortnight later, little Father Pyotr walked for the last time
      round the villas and, to Groholsky’s immense relief, departed. He
      had enjoyed himself, and went off very well satisfied. Liza and Groholsky
      fell back into their old manner of life. Groholsky once more blessed his
      fate. But his happiness did not last for long. A new trouble worse than
      Father Pyotr followed. Ivan Petrovitch took to coming to see them every
      day. Ivan Petrovitch, to be frank, though a capital fellow, was a very
      tedious person. He came at dinner-time, dined with them and stayed a very
      long time. That would not have mattered. But they had to buy vodka, which
      Groholsky could not endure, for his dinner. He would drink five glasses
      and talk the whole dinner-time. That, too, would not have mattered. . . .
      But he would sit on till two o’clock in the morning, and not let
      them get to bed, and, worse still, he permitted himself to talk of things
      about which he should have been silent. When towards two o’clock in
      the morning he had drunk too much vodka and champagne, he would take
      Mishutka in his arms, and weeping, say to him, before Groholsky and Liza:
    

      “Mihail, my son, what am I? I . . . am a scoundrel. I have sold your
      mother! Sold her for thirty pieces of silver, may the Lord punish me!
      Mihail Ivanitch, little sucking pig, where is your mother? Lost! Gone!
      Sold into slavery! Well, I am a scoundrel.”
    

      These tears and these words turned Groholsky’s soul inside out. He
      would look timidly at Liza’s pale face and wring his hands.
    

      “Go to bed, Ivan Petrovitch,” he would say timidly.
    

      “I am going. . . . Come along, Mishutka. . . . The Lord be our
      judge! I cannot think of sleep while I know that my wife is a slave . . .
      . But it is not Groholsky’s fault. . . . The goods were mine, the
      money his. . . . Freedom for the free and Heaven for the saved.”
    

      By day Ivan Petrovitch was no less insufferable to Groholsky. To Groholsky’s
      intense horror, he was always at Liza’s side. He went fishing with
      her, told her stories, walked with her, and even on one occasion, taking
      advantage of Groholsky’s having a cold, carried her off in his
      carriage, goodness knows where, and did not bring her back till night!
    

      “It’s outrageous, inhuman,” thought Groholsky, biting
      his lips.
    

      Groholsky liked to be continually kissing Liza. He could not exist without
      those honeyed kisses, and it was awkward to kiss her before Ivan
      Petrovitch. It was agony. The poor fellow felt forlorn, but fate soon had
      compassion on him. Ivan Petrovitch suddenly went off somewhere for a whole
      week. Visitors had come and carried him off with them . . . And Mishutka
      was taken too.
    

      One fine morning Groholsky came home from a walk good-humoured and
      beaming.
    

      “He has come,” he said to Liza, rubbing his hands. “I am
      very glad he has come. Ha-ha-ha!”
    

      “What are you laughing at?”
    

      “There are women with him.”
    

      “What women?”
    

      “I don’t know. . . . It’s a good thing he has got women.
      . . . A capital thing, in fact. . . . He is still young and fresh. Come
      here! Look!”
    

      Groholsky led Liza on to the verandah, and pointed to the villa opposite.
      They both held their sides, and roared with laughter. It was funny. Ivan
      Petrovitch was standing on the verandah of the villa opposite, smiling.
      Two dark-haired ladies and Mishutka were standing below, under the
      verandah. The ladies were laughing, and loudly talking French.
    

      “French women,” observed Groholsky. “The one nearest us
      isn’t at all bad-looking. Lively damsels, but that’s no
      matter. There are good women to be found even among such. . . . But they
      really do go too far.”
    

      What was funny was that Ivan Petrovitch bent across the verandah, and
      stretching with his long arms, put them round the shoulders of one of the
      French girls, lifted her in the air, and set her giggling on the verandah.
      After lifting up both ladies on to the verandah, he lifted up Mishutka
      too. The ladies ran down and the proceedings were repeated.
    

      “Powerful muscles, I must say,” muttered Groholsky looking at
      this scene. The operation was repeated some six times, the ladies were so
      amiable as to show no embarrassment whatever when the boisterous wind
      disposed of their inflated skirts as it willed while they were being
      lifted. Groholsky dropped his eyes in a shamefaced way when the ladies
      flung their legs over the parapet as they reached the verandah. But Liza
      watched and laughed! What did she care? It was not a case of men
      misbehaving themselves, which would have put her, as a woman, to shame,
      but of ladies.
    

      In the evening, Ivan Petrovitch flew over, and with some embarrassment
      announced that he was now a man with a household to look after . . . .
    

      “You mustn’t imagine they are just anybody,” he said.
      “It is true they are French. They shout at the top of their voices,
      and drink . . . but we all know! The French are brought up to be like
      that! It can’t be helped. . . . The prince,” Ivan Petrovitch
      added, “let me have them almost for nothing. . . . He said: ‘take
      them, take them. . . .’ I must introduce you to the prince sometime.
      A man of culture! He’s for ever writing, writing. . . . And do you
      know what their names are? One is Fanny, the other Isabella. . . . There’s
      Europe, ha-ha-ha! . . . The west! Good-bye!”
    

      Ivan Petrovitch left Liza and Groholsky in peace, and devoted himself to
      his ladies. All day long sound of talk, laughter, and the clatter of
      crockery came from his villa. . . . The lights were not put out till far
      into the night. . . . Groholsky was in bliss. . . . At last, after a
      prolonged interval of agony, he felt happy and at peace again. Ivan
      Petrovitch with his two ladies had no such happiness as he had with one.
      But alas, destiny has no heart. She plays with the Groholskys, the Lizas,
      the Ivans, and the Mishutkas as with pawns. . . . Groholsky lost his peace
      again. . . .
    

      One morning, about ten days afterwards, on waking up late, he went out on
      to the verandah and saw a spectacle which shocked him, revolted him, and
      moved him to intense indignation. Under the verandah of the villa opposite
      stood the French women, and between them Liza. She was talking and looking
      askance at her own villa as though to see whether that tyrant, that despot
      were awake (so Groholsky interpreted those looks). Ivan Petrovitch
      standing on the verandah with his sleeves tucked up, lifted Isabella into
      the air, then Fanny, and then Liza. When he was lifting Liza it seemed to
      Groholsky that he pressed her to himself. . . . Liza too flung one leg
      over the parapet. . . . Oh these women! All sphinxes, every one of them!
    

      When Liza returned home from her husband’s villa and went into the
      bedroom on tip-toe, as though nothing had happened, Groholsky, pale, with
      hectic flushes on his cheeks, was lying in the attitude of a man at his
      last gasp and moaning.
    

      On seeing Liza, he sprang out of bed, and began pacing about the bedroom.
    

      “So that’s what you are like, is it?” he shrieked in a
      high tenor. “So that’s it! Very much obliged to you! It’s
      revolting, madam! Immoral, in fact! Let me tell you that!”
    

      Liza turned pale, and of course burst into tears. When women feel that
      they are in the right, they scold and shed tears; when they are conscious
      of being in fault, they shed tears only.
    

      “On a level with those depraved creatures! It’s . . . it’s
      . . . it’s . . . lower than any impropriety! Why, do you know what
      they are? They are kept women! Cocottes! And you a respectable woman go
      rushing off where they are. . . And he . . . He! What does he want? What
      more does he want of me? I don’t understand it! I have given him
      half of my property—I have given him more! You know it yourself! I
      have given him what I have not myself. . . . I have given him almost all.
      . . . And he! I’ve put up with your calling him Vanya, though he has
      no right whatever to such intimacy. I have put up with your walks, kisses
      after dinner. . . . I have put up with everything, but this I will not put
      up with. . . . Either he or I! Let him go away, or I go away! I’m
      not equal to living like this any longer, no! You can see that for
      yourself! . . . Either he or I. . . . Enough! The cup is brimming over. .
      . . I have suffered a great deal as it is. . . . I am going to talk to him
      at once—this minute! What is he, after all? What has he to be proud
      of? No, indeed. . . . He has no reason to think so much of himself . . . .”
    

      Groholsky said a great many more valiant and stinging things, but did not
      “go at once”; he felt timid and abashed. . . . He went to Ivan
      Petrovitch three days later.
    

      When he went into his apartment, he gaped with astonishment. He was amazed
      at the wealth and luxury with which Bugrov had surrounded himself. Velvet
      hangings, fearfully expensive chairs. . . . One was positively ashamed to
      step on the carpet. Groholsky had seen many rich men in his day, but he
      had never seen such frenzied luxury. . . . And the higgledy-piggledy
      muddle he saw when, with an inexplicable tremor, he walked into the
      drawing-room—plates with bits of bread on them were lying about on
      the grand piano, a glass was standing on a chair, under the table there
      was a basket with a filthy rag in it. . . . Nut shells were strewn about
      in the windows. Bugrov himself was not quite in his usual trim when
      Groholsky walked in . . . . With a red face and uncombed locks he was
      pacing about the room in deshabille, talking to himself, apparently much
      agitated. Mishutka was sitting on the sofa there in the drawing-room, and
      was making the air vibrate with a piercing scream.
    

      “It’s awful, Grigory Vassilyevitch!” Bugrov began on
      seeing Groholsky, “such disorder . . . such disorder . . . Please
      sit down. You must excuse my being in the costume of Adam and Eve. . . .
      It’s of no consequence. . . . Horrible disorderliness! I don’t
      understand how people can exist here, I don’t understand it! The
      servants won’t do what they are told, the climate is horrible,
      everything is expensive. . . . Stop your noise,” Bugrov shouted,
      suddenly coming to a halt before Mishutka; “stop it, I tell you!
      Little beast, won’t you stop it?”
    

      And Bugrov pulled Mishutka’s ear.
    

      “That’s revolting, Ivan Petrovitch,” said Groholsky in a
      tearful voice. “How can you treat a tiny child like that? You really
      are. . .”
    

      “Let him stop yelling then. . . . Be quiet—I’ll whip
      you!”
    

      “Don’t cry, Misha darling. . . . Papa won’t touch you
      again. Don’t beat him, Ivan Petrovitch; why, he is hardly more than
      a baby. . . . There, there. . . . Would you like a little horse? I’ll
      send you a little horse. . . . You really are hard-hearted. . . .”
    

      Groholsky paused, and then asked:
    

      “And how are your ladies getting on, Ivan Petrovitch?”
    

      “Not at all. I’ve turned them out without ceremony. I might
      have gone on keeping them, but it’s awkward. . . . The boy will grow
      up . . . . A father’s example. . . . If I were alone, then it would
      be a different thing. . . . Besides, what’s the use of my keeping
      them? Poof . . . it’s a regular farce! I talk to them in Russian,
      and they answer me in French. They don’t understand a thing—you
      can’t knock anything into their heads.”
    

      “I’ve come to you about something, Ivan Petrovitch, to talk
      things over. . . . H’m. . . . It’s nothing very particular.
      But just . . . two or three words. . . . In reality, I have a favour to
      ask of you.”
    

      “What’s that?”
    

      “Would you think it possible, Ivan Petrovitch, to go away? We are
      delighted that you are here; it’s very agreeable for us, but it’s
      inconvenient, don’t you know. . . . You will understand me. It’s
      awkward in a way. . . . Such indefinite relations, such continual
      awkwardness in regard to one another. . . . We must part. . . . It’s
      essential in fact. Excuse my saying so, but . . . you must see for
      yourself, of course, that in such circumstances to be living side by side
      leads to . . . reflections . . . that is . . . not to reflections, but
      there is a certain awkward feeling. . . .”
    

      “Yes. . . . That is so, I have thought of it myself. Very good, I
      will go away.”
    

      “We shall be very grateful to you. . . . Believe me, Ivan
      Petrovitch, we shall preserve the most flattering memory of you. The
      sacrifice which you. . .”
    

      “Very good. . . . Only what am I to do with all this? I say, you buy
      this furniture of mine! What do you say? It’s not expensive, eight
      thousand . . . ten. . . . The furniture, the carriage, the grand piano. .
      . .”
    

      “Very good. . . . I will give you ten thousand. . . .”
    

      “Well, that is capital! I will set off to-morrow. I shall go to
      Moscow. It’s impossible to live here. Everything is so dear! Awfully
      dear! The money fairly flies. . . . You can’t take a step without
      spending a thousand! I can’t go on like that. I have a child to
      bring up. . . . Well, thank God that you will buy my furniture. . . . That
      will be a little more in hand, or I should have been regularly bankrupt. .
      . .”
    

      Groholsky got up, took leave of Bugrov, and went home rejoicing. In the
      evening he sent him ten thousand roubles.
    

      Early next morning Bugrov and Mishutka were already at Feodosia.
    

      III
    

      Several months had passed; spring had come. With spring, fine bright days
      had come too. Life was not so dull and hateful, and the earth was more
      fair to look upon. . . . There was a warm breeze from the sea and the open
      country. . . . The earth was covered with fresh grass, fresh leaves were
      green upon the trees. Nature had sprung into new life, and had put on new
      array.
    

      It might be thought that new hopes and new desires would surge up in man
      when everything in nature is renewed, and young and fresh . . . but it is
      hard for man to renew life. . . .
    

      Groholsky was still living in the same villa. His hopes and desires, small
      and unexacting, were still concentrated on the same Liza, on her alone,
      and on nothing else! As before, he could not take his eyes off her, and
      gloated over the thought: how happy I am! The poor fellow really did feel
      awfully happy. Liza sat as before on the verandah, and unaccountably
      stared with bored eyes at the villa opposite and the trees near it through
      which there was a peep at the dark blue sea. . . . As before, she spent
      her days for the most part in silence, often in tears and from time to
      time in putting mustard plasters on Groholsky. She might be congratulated
      on one new sensation, however. There was a worm gnawing at her vitals. . .
      . That worm was misery. . . . She was fearfully miserable, pining for her
      son, for her old, her cheerful manner of life. Her life in the past had
      not been particularly cheerful, but still it was livelier than her present
      existence. When she lived with her husband she used from time to time to
      go to a theatre, to an entertainment, to visit acquaintances. But here
      with Groholsky it was all quietness and emptiness. . . . Besides, here
      there was one man, and he with his ailments and his continual mawkish
      kisses, was like an old grandfather for ever shedding tears of joy.
    

      It was boring! Here she had not Mihey Sergeyitch who used to be fond of
      dancing the mazurka with her. She had not Spiridon Nikolaitch, the son of
      the editor of the Provincial News. Spiridon Nikolaitch sang well
      and recited poetry. Here she had not a table set with lunch for visitors.
      She had not Gerasimovna, the old nurse who used to be continually
      grumbling at her for eating too much jam. . . . She had no one! There was
      simply nothing for her but to lie down and die of depression. Groholsky
      rejoiced in his solitude, but . . . he was wrong to rejoice in it. All too
      soon he paid for his egoism. At the beginning of May when the very air
      seemed to be in love and faint with happiness, Groholsky lost everything;
      the woman he loved and. . .
    

      That year Bugrov, too, visited the Crimea. He did not take the villa
      opposite, but pottered about, going from one town to another with
      Mishutka. He spent his time eating, drinking, sleeping, and playing cards.
      He had lost all relish for fishing, shooting and the French women, who,
      between ourselves, had robbed him a bit. He had grown thin, lost his broad
      and beaming smiles, and had taken to dressing in canvas. Ivan Petrovitch
      from time to time visited Groholsky’s villa. He brought Liza jam,
      sweets, and fruit, and seemed trying to dispel her ennui. Groholsky was
      not troubled by these visits, especially as they were brief and
      infrequent, and were apparently paid on account of Mishutka, who could not
      under any circumstances have been altogether deprived of the privilege of
      seeing his mother. Bugrov came, unpacked his presents, and after saying a
      few words, departed. And those few words he said not to Liza but to
      Groholsky . . . . With Liza he was silent and Groholsky’s mind was
      at rest; but there is a Russian proverb which he would have done well to
      remember: “Don’t fear the dog that barks, but fear the dog
      that’s quiet. . . .” A fiendish proverb, but in practical life
      sometimes indispensable.
    

      As he was walking in the garden one day, Groholsky heard two voices in
      conversation. One voice was a man’s, the other was a woman’s.
      One belonged to Bugrov, the other to Liza. Groholsky listened, and turning
      white as death, turned softly towards the speakers. He halted behind a
      lilac bush, and proceeded to watch and listen. His arms and legs turned
      cold. A cold sweat came out upon his brow. He clutched several branches of
      the lilac that he might not stagger and fall down. All was over!
    

      Bugrov had his arm round Liza’s waist, and was saying to her:
    

      “My darling! what are we to do? It seems it was God’s will. .
      . . I am a scoundrel. . . . I sold you. I was seduced by that Herod’s
      money, plague take him, and what good have I had from the money? Nothing
      but anxiety and display! No peace, no happiness, no position . . . . One
      sits like a fat invalid at the same spot, and never a step forwarder. . .
      . Have you heard that Andrushka Markuzin has been made a head clerk?
      Andrushka, that fool! While I stagnate. . . . Good heavens! I have lost
      you, I have lost my happiness. I am a scoundrel, a blackguard, how do you
      think I shall feel at the dread day of judgment?”
    

      “Let us go away, Vanya,” wailed Liza. “I am dull. . . .
      I am dying of depression.”
    

      “We cannot, the money has been taken. . . .”
    

      “Well, give it back again.”
    

      “I should be glad to, but . . . wait a minute. I have spent it all.
      We must submit, my girl. God is chastising us. Me for my covetousness and
      you for your frivolity. Well, let us be tortured. . . . It will be the
      better for us in the next world.”
    

      And in an access of religious feeling, Bugrov turned up his eyes to
      heaven.
    

      “But I cannot go on living here; I am miserable.”
    

      “Well, there is no help for it. I’m miserable too. Do you
      suppose I am happy without you? I am pining and wasting away! And my chest
      has begun to be bad! . . . You are my lawful wife, flesh of my flesh . . .
      one flesh. . . . You must live and bear it! While I . . . will drive over
      . . . visit you.”
    

      And bending down to Liza, Bugrov whispered, loudly enough, however, to be
      heard several yards away:
    

      “I will come to you at night, Lizanka. . . . Don’t worry. . .
      . I am staying at Feodosia close by. . . . I will live here near you till
      I have run through everything . . . and I soon shall be at my last
      farthing! A-a-ah, what a life it is! Dreariness, ill . . . my chest is
      bad, and my stomach is bad.”
    

      Bugrov ceased speaking, and then it was Liza’s turn. . . . My God,
      the cruelty of that woman! She began weeping, complaining, enumerating all
      the defects of her lover and her own sufferings. Groholsky as he listened
      to her, felt that he was a villain, a miscreant, a murderer.
    

      “He makes me miserable. . . .” Liza said in conclusion.
    

      After kissing Liza at parting, and going out at the garden gate, Bugrov
      came upon Groholsky, who was standing at the gate waiting for him.
    

      “Ivan Petrovitch,” said Groholsky in the tone of a dying man,
      “I have seen and heard it all. . . It’s not honourable on your
      part, but I do not blame you. . . . You love her too, but you must
      understand that she is mine. Mine! I cannot live without her! How is it
      you don’t understand that? Granted that you love her, that you are
      miserable. . . . Have I not paid you, in part at least, for your
      sufferings? For God’s sake, go away! For God’s sake, go away!
      Go away from here for ever, I implore you, or you will kill me. . . .”
    

      “I have nowhere to go,” Bugrov said thickly.
    

      “H’m, you have squandered everything. . . . You are an
      impulsive man. Very well. . . . Go to my estate in the province of
      Tchernigov. If you like I will make you a present of the property. It’s
      a small estate, but a good one. . . . On my honour, it’s a good one!”
    

      Bugrov gave a broad grin. He suddenly felt himself in the seventh heaven.
    

      “I will give it you. . . . This very day I will write to my steward
      and send him an authorisation for completing the purchase. You must tell
      everyone you have bought it. . . . Go away, I entreat you.”
    

      “Very good, I will go. I understand.”
    

      “Let us go to a notary . . . at once,” said Groholsky, greatly
      cheered, and he went to order the carriage.
    

      On the following evening, when Liza was sitting on the garden seat where
      her rendezvous with Ivan Petrovitch usually took place, Groholsky went
      quietly to her. He sat down beside her, and took her hand.
    

      “Are you dull, Lizotchka?” he said, after a brief silence.
      “Are you depressed? Why shouldn’t we go away somewhere? Why is
      it we always stay at home? We want to go about, to enjoy ourselves, to
      make acquaintances. . . . Don’t we?”
    

      “I want nothing,” said Liza, and turned her pale, thin face
      towards the path by which Bugrov used to come to her.
    

      Groholsky pondered. He knew who it was she expected, who it was she
      wanted.
    

      “Let us go home, Liza,” he said, “it is damp here. . . .”
    

      “You go; I’ll come directly.”
    

      Groholsky pondered again.
    

      “You are expecting him?” he asked, and made a wry face as
      though his heart had been gripped with red-hot pincers.
    

      “Yes. . . . I want to give him the socks for Misha. . . .”
    

      “He will not come.”
    

      “How do you know?”
    

      “He has gone away. . . .”
    

      Liza opened her eyes wide. . . .
    

      “He has gone away, gone to the Tchernigov province. I have given him
      my estate. . . .”
    

      Liza turned fearfully pale, and caught at Groholsky’s shoulder to
      save herself from falling.
    

      “I saw him off at the steamer at three o’clock.”
    

      Liza suddenly clutched at her head, made a movement, and falling on the
      seat, began shaking all over.
    

      “Vanya,” she wailed, “Vanya! I will go to Vanya. . . .
      Darling!”
    

      She had a fit of hysterics. . . .
    

      And from that evening, right up to July, two shadows could be seen in the
      park in which the summer visitors took their walks. The shadows wandered
      about from morning till evening, and made the summer visitors feel dismal.
      . . . After Liza’s shadow invariably walked the shadow of Groholsky.
      . . . I call them shadows because they had both lost their natural
      appearance. They had grown thin and pale and shrunken, and looked more
      like shadows than living people. . . . Both were pining away like fleas in
      the classic anecdote of the Jew who sold insect powder.
    

      At the beginning of July, Liza ran away from Groholsky, leaving a note in
      which she wrote that she was going for a time to “her son” . .
      . For a time! She ran away by night when Groholsky was asleep . . . .
      After reading her letter Groholsky spent a whole week wandering round
      about the villa as though he were mad, and neither ate nor slept. In
      August, he had an attack of recurrent fever, and in September he went
      abroad. There he took to drink. . . . He hoped in drink and dissipation to
      find comfort. . . . He squandered all his fortune, but did not succeed,
      poor fellow, in driving out of his brain the image of the beloved woman
      with the kittenish face . . . . Men do not die of happiness, nor do they
      die of misery. Groholsky’s hair went grey, but he did not die: he is
      alive to this day. . . . He came back from abroad to have “just a
      peep” at Liza . . . . Bugrov met him with open arms, and made him
      stay for an indefinite period. He is staying with Bugrov to this day.
    

      This year I happened to be passing through Groholyovka, Bugrov’s
      estate. I found the master and the mistress of the house having supper. .
      . . Ivan Petrovitch was highly delighted to see me, and fell to pressing
      good things upon me. . . . He had grown rather stout, and his face was a
      trifle puffy, though it was still rosy and looked sleek and
      well-nourished. . . . He was not bald. Liza, too, had grown fatter.
      Plumpness did not suit her. Her face was beginning to lose the kittenish
      look, and was, alas! more suggestive of the seal. Her cheeks were
      spreading upwards, outwards, and to both sides. The Bugrovs were living in
      first-rate style. They had plenty of everything. The house was overflowing
      with servants and edibles. . . .
    

      When we had finished supper we got into conversation. Forgetting that Liza
      did not play, I asked her to play us something on the piano.
    

      “She does not play,” said Bugrov; “she is no musician. .
      . . Hey, you there! Ivan! call Grigory Vassilyevitch here! What’s he
      doing there?” And turning to me, Bugrov added, “Our musician
      will come directly; he plays the guitar. We keep the piano for Mishutka—we
      are having him taught. . . .”
    

      Five minutes later, Groholsky walked into the room—sleepy, unkempt,
      and unshaven. . . . He walked in, bowed to me, and sat down on one side.
    

      “Why, whoever goes to bed so early?” said Bugrov, addressing
      him. “What a fellow you are really! He’s always asleep, always
      asleep . . . The sleepy head! Come, play us something lively. . . .”
    

      Groholsky turned the guitar, touched the strings, and began singing:
    

          “Yesterday I waited for my dear one. . . .”
 

      I listened to the singing, looked at Bugrov’s well-fed countenance,
      and thought: “Nasty brute!” I felt like crying. . . . When he
      had finished singing, Groholsky bowed to us, and went out.
    

      “And what am I to do with him?” Bugrov said when he had gone
      away. “I do have trouble with him! In the day he is always brooding
      and brooding. . . . And at night he moans. . . . He sleeps, but he sighs
      and moans in his sleep. . . . It is a sort of illness. . . . What am I to
      do with him, I can’t think! He won’t let us sleep. . . . I am
      afraid that he will go out of his mind. People think he is badly treated
      here. . . . In what way is he badly treated? He eats with us, and he
      drinks with us. . . . Only we won’t give him money. If we were to
      give him any he would spend it on drink or waste it . . . . That’s
      another trouble for me! Lord forgive me, a sinner!”
    

      They made me stay the night. When I woke next morning, Bugrov was giving
      some one a lecture in the adjoining room. . . .
    

      “Set a fool to say his prayers, and he will crack his skull on the
      floor! Why, who paints oars green! Do think, blockhead! Use your sense!
      Why don’t you speak?”
    

      “I . . . I . . . made a mistake,” said a husky tenor
      apologetically.
    

      The tenor belonged to Groholsky.
    

      Groholsky saw me to the station.
    

      “He is a despot, a tyrant,” he kept whispering to me all the
      way. “He is a generous man, but a tyrant! Neither heart nor brain
      are developed in him. . . . He tortures me! If it were not for that noble
      woman, I should have gone away long ago. I am sorry to leave her. It’s
      somehow easier to endure together.”
    

      Groholsky heaved a sigh, and went on:
    

      “She is with child. . . . You notice it? It is really my child. . .
      . Mine. . . . She soon saw her mistake, and gave herself to me again. She
      cannot endure him. . . .”
    

      “You are a rag,” I could not refrain from saying to Groholsky.
    

      “Yes, I am a man of weak character. . . . That is quite true. I was
      born so. Do you know how I came into the world? My late papa cruelly
      oppressed a certain little clerk—it was awful how he treated him! He
      poisoned his life. Well . . . and my late mama was tender-hearted. She
      came from the people, she was of the working class. . . . She took that
      little clerk to her heart from pity. . . . Well . . . and so I came into
      the world. . . . The son of the ill-treated clerk. How could I have a
      strong will? Where was I to get it from? But that’s the second bell.
      . . . Good-bye. Come and see us again, but don’t tell Ivan
      Petrovitch what I have said about him.”
    

      I pressed Groholsky’s hand, and got into the train. He bowed towards
      the carriage, and went to the water-barrel—I suppose he was thirsty!
    











      THE DOCTOR
    

IT was still in the
      drawing-room, so still that a house-fly that had flown in from outside
      could be distinctly heard brushing against the ceiling. Olga Ivanovna, the
      lady of the villa, was standing by the window, looking out at the
      flower-beds and thinking. Dr. Tsvyetkov, who was her doctor as well as an
      old friend, and had been sent for to treat her son Misha, was sitting in
      an easy chair and swinging his hat, which he held in both hands, and he
      too was thinking. Except them, there was not a soul in the drawing-room or
      in the adjoining rooms. The sun had set, and the shades of evening began
      settling in the corners under the furniture and on the cornices.
    

      The silence was broken by Olga Ivanovna.
    

      “No misfortune more terrible can be imagined,” she said,
      without turning from the window. “You know that life has no value
      for me whatever apart from the boy.”
    

      “Yes, I know that,” said the doctor.
    

      “No value whatever,” said Olga Ivanovna, and her voice
      quivered. “He is everything to me. He is my joy, my happiness, my
      wealth. And if, as you say, I cease to be a mother, if he . . . dies,
      there will be nothing left of me but a shadow. I cannot survive it.”
    

      Wringing her hands, Olga Ivanovna walked from one window to the other and
      went on:
    

      “When he was born, I wanted to send him away to the Foundling
      Hospital, you remember that, but, my God, how can that time be compared
      with now? Then I was vulgar, stupid, feather-headed, but now I am a
      mother, do you understand? I am a mother, and that’s all I care to
      know. Between the present and the past there is an impassable gulf.”
    

      Silence followed again. The doctor shifted his seat from the chair to the
      sofa and impatiently playing with his hat, kept his eyes fixed upon Olga
      Ivanovna. From his face it could be seen that he wanted to speak, and was
      waiting for a fitting moment.
    

      “You are silent, but still I do not give up hope,” said the
      lady, turning round. “Why are you silent?”
    

      “I should be as glad of any hope as you, Olga, but there is none,”
      Tsvyetkov answered, “we must look the hideous truth in the face. The
      boy has a tumour on the brain, and we must try to prepare ourselves for
      his death, for such cases never recover.”
    

      “Nikolay, are you certain you are not mistaken?”
    

      “Such questions lead to nothing. I am ready to answer as many as you
      like, but it will make it no better for us.”
    

      Olga Ivanovna pressed her face into the window curtains, and began weeping
      bitterly. The doctor got up and walked several times up and down the
      drawing-room, then went to the weeping woman, and lightly touched her arm.
      Judging from his uncertain movements, from the expression of his gloomy
      face, which looked dark in the dusk of the evening, he wanted to say
      something.
    

      “Listen, Olga,” he began. “Spare me a minute’s
      attention; there is something I must ask you. You can’t attend to me
      now, though. I’ll come later, afterwards. . . .” He sat down
      again, and sank into thought. The bitter, imploring weeping, like the
      weeping of a little girl, continued. Without waiting for it to end,
      Tsvyetkov heaved a sigh and walked out of the drawing-room. He went into
      the nursery to Misha. The boy was lying on his back as before, staring at
      one point as though he were listening. The doctor sat down on his bed and
      felt his pulse.
    

      “Misha, does your head ache?” he asked.
    

      Misha answered, not at once: “Yes. I keep dreaming.”
    

      “What do you dream?”
    

      “All sorts of things. . . .”
    

      The doctor, who did not know how to talk with weeping women or with
      children, stroked his burning head, and muttered:
    

      “Never mind, poor boy, never mind. . . . One can’t go through
      life without illness. . . . Misha, who am I—do you know me?”
    

      Misha did not answer.
    

      “Does your head ache very badly?”
    

      “Ve-ery. I keep dreaming.”
    

      After examining him and putting a few questions to the maid who was
      looking after the sick child, the doctor went slowly back to the
      drawing-room. There it was by now dark, and Olga Ivanovna, standing by the
      window, looked like a silhouette.
    

      “Shall I light up?” asked Tsvyetkov.
    

      No answer followed. The house-fly was still brushing against the ceiling.
      Not a sound floated in from outside as though the whole world, like the
      doctor, were thinking, and could not bring itself to speak. Olga Ivanovna
      was not weeping now, but as before, staring at the flower-bed in profound
      silence. When Tsvyetkov went up to her, and through the twilight glanced
      at her pale face, exhausted with grief, her expression was such as he had
      seen before during her attacks of acute, stupefying, sick headache.
    

      “Nikolay Trofimitch!” she addressed him, “and what do
      you think about a consultation?”
    

      “Very good; I’ll arrange it to-morrow.”
    

      From the doctor’s tone it could be easily seen that he put little
      faith in the benefit of a consultation. Olga Ivanovna would have asked him
      something else, but her sobs prevented her. Again she pressed her face
      into the window curtain. At that moment, the strains of a band playing at
      the club floated in distinctly. They could hear not only the wind
      instruments, but even the violins and the flutes.
    

      “If he is in pain, why is he silent?” asked Olga Ivanovna.
      “All day long, not a sound, he never complains, and never cries. I
      know God will take the poor boy from us because we have not known how to
      prize him. Such a treasure!”
    

      The band finished the march, and a minute later began playing a lively
      waltz for the opening of the ball.
    

      “Good God, can nothing really be done?” moaned Olga Ivanovna.
      “Nikolay, you are a doctor and ought to know what to do! You must
      understand that I can’t bear the loss of him! I can’t survive
      it.”
    

      The doctor, who did not know how to talk to weeping women, heaved a sigh,
      and paced slowly about the drawing-room. There followed a succession of
      oppressive pauses interspersed with weeping and the questions which lead
      to nothing. The band had already played a quadrille, a polka, and another
      quadrille. It got quite dark. In the adjoining room, the maid lighted the
      lamp; and all the while the doctor kept his hat in his hands, and seemed
      trying to say something. Several times Olga Ivanovna went off to her son,
      sat by him for half an hour, and came back again into the drawing-room;
      she was continually breaking into tears and lamentations. The time dragged
      agonisingly, and it seemed as though the evening had no end.
    

      At midnight, when the band had played the cotillion and ceased altogether,
      the doctor got ready to go.
    

      “I will come again to-morrow,” he said, pressing the mother’s
      cold hand. “You go to bed.”
    

      After putting on his greatcoat in the passage and picking up his
      walking-stick, he stopped, thought a minute, and went back into the
      drawing-room.
    

      “I’ll come to-morrow, Olga,” he repeated in a quivering
      voice. “Do you hear?”
    

      She did not answer, and it seemed as though grief had robbed her of all
      power of speech. In his greatcoat and with his stick still in his hand,
      the doctor sat down beside her, and began in a soft, tender half-whisper,
      which was utterly out of keeping with his heavy, dignified figure:
    

      “Olga! For the sake of your sorrow which I share. . . . Now, when
      falsehood is criminal, I beseech you to tell me the truth. You have always
      declared that the boy is my son. Is that the truth?”
    

      Olga Ivanovna was silent.
    

      “You have been the one attachment in my life,” the doctor went
      on, “and you cannot imagine how deeply my feeling is wounded by
      falsehood . . . . Come, I entreat you, Olga, for once in your life, tell
      me the truth. . . . At these moments one cannot lie. Tell me that Misha is
      not my son. I am waiting.”
    

      “He is.”
    

      Olga Ivanovna’s face could not be seen, but in her voice the doctor
      could hear hesitation. He sighed.
    

      “Even at such moments you can bring yourself to tell a lie,”
      he said in his ordinary voice. “There is nothing sacred to you! Do
      listen, do understand me. . . . You have been the one only attachment in
      my life. Yes, you were depraved, vulgar, but I have loved no one else but
      you in my life. That trivial love, now that I am growing old, is the one
      solitary bright spot in my memories. Why do you darken it with deception?
      What is it for?”
    

      “I don’t understand you.”
    

      “Oh my God!” cried Tsvyetkov. “You are lying, you
      understand very well!” he cried more loudly, and he began pacing
      about the drawing-room, angrily waving his stick. “Or have you
      forgotten? Then I will remind you! A father’s rights to the boy are
      equally shared with me by Petrov and Kurovsky the lawyer, who still make
      you an allowance for their son’s education, just as I do! Yes,
      indeed! I know all that quite well! I forgive your lying in the past, what
      does it matter? But now when you have grown older, at this moment when the
      boy is dying, your lying stifles me! How sorry I am that I cannot speak,
      how sorry I am!”
    

      The doctor unbuttoned his overcoat, and still pacing about, said:
    

      “Wretched woman! Even such moments have no effect on her! Even now
      she lies as freely as nine years ago in the Hermitage Restaurant! She is
      afraid if she tells me the truth I shall leave off giving her money, she
      thinks that if she did not lie I should not love the boy! You are lying!
      It’s contemptible!”
    

      The doctor rapped the floor with his stick, and cried:
    

      “It’s loathsome. Warped, corrupted creature! I must despise
      you, and I ought to be ashamed of my feeling. Yes! Your lying has stuck in
      my throat these nine years, I have endured it, but now it’s too much—too
      much.”
    

      From the dark corner where Olga Ivanovna was sitting there came the sound
      of weeping. The doctor ceased speaking and cleared his throat. A silence
      followed. The doctor slowly buttoned up his over-coat, and began looking
      for his hat which he had dropped as he walked about.
    

      “I lost my temper,” he muttered, bending down to the floor.
      “I quite lost sight of the fact that you cannot attend to me now. .
      . . God knows what I have said. . . . Don’t take any notice of it,
      Olga.”
    

      He found his hat and went towards the dark corner.
    

      “I have wounded you,” he said in a soft, tender half-whisper,
      “but once more I entreat you, tell me the truth; there should not be
      lying between us. . . . I blurted it out, and now you know that Petrov and
      Kurovsky are no secret to me. So now it is easy for you to tell me the
      truth.”
    

      Olga Ivanovna thought a moment, and with perceptible hesitation, said:
    

      “Nikolay, I am not lying—Misha is your child.”
    

      “My God,” moaned the doctor, “then I will tell you
      something more: I have kept your letter to Petrov in which you call him
      Misha’s father! Olga, I know the truth, but I want to hear it from
      you! Do you hear?”
    

      Olga Ivanovna made no reply, but went on weeping. After waiting for an
      answer the doctor shrugged his shoulders and went out.
    

      “I will come to-morrow,” he called from the passage.
    

      All the way home, as he sat in his carriage, he was shrugging his
      shoulders and muttering:
    

      “What a pity that I don’t know how to speak! I haven’t
      the gift of persuading and convincing. It’s evident she does not
      understand me since she lies! It’s evident! How can I make her see?
      How?”
    











      TOO EARLY!
    

THE bells are
      ringing for service in the village of Shalmovo. The sun is already kissing
      the earth on the horizon; it has turned crimson and will soon disappear.
      In Semyon’s pothouse, which has lately changed its name and become a
      restaurant—a title quite out of keeping with the wretched little hut
      with its thatch torn off its roof, and its couple of dingy windows—two
      peasant sportsmen are sitting. One of them is called Filimon Slyunka; he
      is an old man of sixty, formerly a house-serf, belonging to the Counts
      Zavalin, by trade a carpenter. He has at one time been employed in a nail
      factory, has been turned off for drunkenness and idleness, and now lives
      upon his old wife, who begs for alms. He is thin and weak, with a
      mangy-looking little beard, speaks with a hissing sound, and after every
      word twitches the right side of his face and jerkily shrugs his right
      shoulder. The other, Ignat Ryabov, a sturdy, broad-shouldered peasant who
      never does anything and is everlastingly silent, is sitting in the corner
      under a big string of bread rings. The door, opening inwards, throws a
      thick shadow upon him, so that Slyunka and Semyon the publican can see
      nothing but his patched knees, his long fleshy nose, and a big tuft of
      hair which has escaped from the thick uncombed tangle covering his head.
      Semyon, a sickly little man, with a pale face and a long sinewy neck,
      stands behind his counter, looks mournfully at the string of bread rings,
      and coughs meekly.
    

      “You think it over now, if you have any sense,” Slyunka says
      to him, twitching his cheek. “You have the thing lying by unused and
      get no sort of benefit from it. While we need it. A sportsman without a
      gun is like a sacristan without a voice. You ought to understand that, but
      I see you don’t understand it, so you can have no real sense. . . .
      Hand it over!”
    

      “You left the gun in pledge, you know!” says Semyon in a thin
      womanish little voice, sighing deeply, and not taking his eyes off the
      string of bread rings. “Hand over the rouble you borrowed, and then
      take your gun.”
    

      “I haven’t got a rouble. I swear to you, Semyon Mitritch, as
      God sees me: you give me the gun and I will go to-day with Ignashka and
      bring it you back again. I’ll bring it back, strike me dead. May I
      have happiness neither in this world nor the next, if I don’t.”
    

      “Semyon Mitritch, do give it,” Ignat Ryabov says in his bass,
      and his voice betrays a passionate desire to get what he asks for.
    

      “But what do you want the gun for?” sighs Semyon, sadly
      shaking his head. “What sort of shooting is there now? It’s
      still winter outside, and no game at all but crows and jackdaws.”
    

      “Winter, indeed,” says Slyunka, hooing the ash out of his pipe
      with his finger, “it is early yet of course, but you never can tell
      with the snipe. The snipe’s a bird that wants watching. If you are
      unlucky, you may sit waiting at home, and miss his flying over, and then
      you must wait till autumn. . . . It is a business! The snipe is not a
      rook. . . . Last year he was flying the week before Easter, while the year
      before we had to wait till the week after Easter! Come, do us a favour,
      Semyon Mitritch, give us the gun. Make us pray for you for ever. As
      ill-luck would have it, Ignashka has pledged his gun for drink too. Ah,
      when you drink you feel nothing, but now . . . ah, I wish I had never
      looked at it, the cursed vodka! Truly it is the blood of Satan! Give it
      us, Semyon Mitritch!”
    

      “I won’t give it you,” says Semyon, clasping his yellow
      hands on his breast as though he were going to pray. “You must act
      fairly, Filimonushka. . . . A thing is not taken out of pawn just anyhow;
      you must pay the money. . . . Besides, what do you want to kill birds for?
      What’s the use? It’s Lent now—you are not going to eat
      them.”
    

      Slyunka exchanges glances with Ryabov in embarrassment, sighs, and says:
      “We would only go stand-shooting.”
    

      “And what for? It’s all foolishness. You are not the sort of
      man to spend your time in foolishness. . . . Ignashka, to be sure, is a
      man of no understanding, God has afflicted him, but you, thank the Lord,
      are an old man. It’s time to prepare for your end. Here, you ought
      to go to the midnight service.”
    

      The allusion to his age visibly stings Slyunka. He clears his throat,
      wrinkles up his forehead, and remains silent for a full minute.
    

      “I say, Semyon Mitritch,” he says hotly, getting up and
      twitching not only in his right cheek but all over his face. “It’s
      God’s truth. . . . May the Almighty strike me dead, after Easter I
      shall get something from Stepan Kuzmitch for an axle, and I will pay you
      not one rouble but two! May the Lord chastise me! Before the holy image, I
      tell you, only give me the gun!”
    

      “Gi-ive it,” Ryabov says in his growling bass; they can hear
      him breathing hard, and it seems that he would like to say a great deal,
      but cannot find the words. “Gi-ive it.”
    

      “No, brothers, and don’t ask,” sighs Semyon, shaking his
      head mournfully. “Don’t lead me into sin. I won’t give
      you the gun. It’s not the fashion for a thing to be taken out of
      pawn and no money paid. Besides—why this indulgence? Go your way and
      God bless you!”
    

      Slyunka rubs his perspiring face with his sleeve and begins hotly swearing
      and entreating. He crosses himself, holds out his hands to the ikon, calls
      his deceased father and mother to bear witness, but Semyon sighs and
      meekly looks as before at the string of bread rings. In the end Ignashka
      Ryabov, hitherto motionless, gets up impulsively and bows down to the
      ground before the innkeeper, but even that has no effect on him.
    

      “May you choke with my gun, you devil,” says Slyunka, with his
      face twitching, and his shoulders, shrugging. “May you choke, you
      plague, you scoundrelly soul.”
    

      Swearing and shaking his fists, he goes out of the tavern with Ryabov and
      stands still in the middle of the road.
    

      “He won’t give it, the damned brute,” he says, in a
      weeping voice, looking into Ryabov’s face with an injured air.
    

      “He won’t give it,” booms Ryabov.
    

      The windows of the furthest huts, the starling cote on the tavern, the
      tops of the poplars, and the cross on the church are all gleaming with a
      bright golden flame. Now they can see only half of the sun, which, as it
      goes to its night’s rest, is winking, shedding a crimson light, and
      seems laughing gleefully. Slyunka and Ryabov can see the forest lying, a
      dark blur, to the right of the sun, a mile and a half from the village,
      and tiny clouds flitting over the clear sky, and they feel that the
      evening will be fine and still.
    

      “Now is just the time,” says Slyunka, with his face twitching.
      “It would be nice to stand for an hour or two. He won’t give
      it us, the damned brute. May he . . .”
    

      “For stand-shooting, now is the very time . . .” Ryabov
      articulated, as though with an effort, stammering.
    

      After standing still for a little they walk out of the village, without
      saying a word to each other, and look towards the dark streak of the
      forest. The whole sky above the forest is studded with moving black spots,
      the rooks flying home to roost. The snow, lying white here and there on
      the dark brown plough-land, is lightly flecked with gold by the sun.
    

      “This time last year I went stand-shooting in Zhivki,” says
      Slyunka, after a long silence. “I brought back three snipe.”
    

      Again there follows a silence. Both stand a long time and look towards the
      forest, and then lazily move and walk along the muddy road from the
      village.
    

      “It’s most likely the snipe haven’t come yet,”
      says Slyunka, “but may be they are here.”
    

      “Kostka says they are not here yet.”
    

      “Maybe they are not, who can tell; one year is not like another. But
      what mud!”
    

      “But we ought to stand.”
    

      “To be sure we ought—why not?”
    

      “We can stand and watch; it wouldn’t be amiss to go to the
      forest and have a look. If they are there we will tell Kostka, or maybe
      get a gun ourselves and come to-morrow. What a misfortune, God forgive me.
      It was the devil put it in my mind to take my gun to the pothouse! I am
      more sorry than I can tell you, Ignashka.”
    

      Conversing thus, the sportsmen approach the forest. The sun has set and
      left behind it a red streak like the glow of a fire, scattered here and
      there with clouds; there is no catching the colours of those clouds: their
      edges are red, but they themselves are one minute grey, at the next lilac,
      at the next ashen.
    

      In the forest, among the thick branches of fir-trees and under the birch
      bushes, it is dark, and only the outermost twigs on the side of the sun,
      with their fat buds and shining bark, stand out clearly in the air. There
      is a smell of thawing snow and rotting leaves. It is still; nothing stirs.
      From the distance comes the subsiding caw of the rooks.
    

      “We ought to be standing in Zhivki now,” whispers Slyunka,
      looking with awe at Ryabov; “there’s good stand-shooting
      there.”
    

      Ryabov too looks with awe at Slyunka, with unbKlinking eyes and open mouth.
    

      “A lovely time,” Slyunka says in a trembling whisper. “The
      Lord is sending a fine spring . . . and I should think the snipe are here
      by now. . . . Why not? The days are warm now. . . . The cranes were flying
      in the morning, lots and lots of them.”
    

      Slyunka and Ryabov, splashing cautiously through the melting snow and
      sticking in the mud, walk two hundred paces along the edge of the forest
      and there halt. Their faces wear a look of alarm and expectation of
      something terrible and extraordinary. They stand like posts, do not speak
      nor stir, and their hands gradually fall into an attitude as though they
      were holding a gun at the cock. . . .
    

      A big shadow creeps from the left and envelops the earth. The dusk of
      evening comes on. If one looks to the right, through the bushes and tree
      trunks, there can be seen crimson patches of the after-glow. It is still
      and damp. . . .
    

      “There’s no sound of them,” whispers Slyunka, shrugging
      with the cold and sniffing with his chilly nose.
    

      But frightened by his own whisper, he holds his finger up at some one,
      opens his eyes wide, and purses up his lips. There is a sound of a light
      snapping. The sportsmen look at each other significantly, and tell each
      other with their eyes that it is nothing. It is the snapping of a dry twig
      or a bit of bark. The shadows of evening keep growing and growing, the
      patches of crimson gradually grow dim, and the dampness becomes
      unpleasant.
    

      The sportsmen remain standing a long time, but they see and hear nothing.
      Every instant they expect to see a delicate leaf float through the air, to
      hear a hurried call like the husky cough of a child, and the flutter of
      wings.
    

      “No, not a sound,” Slyunka says aloud, dropping his hands and
      beginning to bKlink. “So they have not come yet.”
    

      “It’s early!”
    

      “You are right there.”
    

      The sportsmen cannot see each other’s faces, it is getting rapidly
      dark.
    

      “We must wait another five days,” says Slyunka, as he comes
      out from behind a bush with Ryabov. “It’s too early!”
    

      They go homewards, and are silent all the way.
    











      THE COSSACK
    

MAXIM TORTCHAKOV, a
      farmer in southern Russia, was driving home from church with his young
      wife and bringing back an Easter cake which had just been blessed. The sun
      had not yet risen, but the east was all tinged with red and gold and had
      dissipated the haze which usually, in the early morning, screens the blue
      of the sky from the eyes. It was quiet. . . . The birds were hardly yet
      awake . . . . The corncrake uttered its clear note, and far away above a
      little tumulus, a sleepy kite floated, heavily flapping its wings, and no
      other living creature could be seen all over the steppe.
    

      Tortchakov drove on and thought that there was no better nor happier
      holiday than the Feast of Christ’s Resurrection. He had only lately
      been married, and was now keeping his first Easter with his wife. Whatever
      he looked at, whatever he thought about, it all seemed to him bright,
      joyous, and happy. He thought about his farming, and thought that it was
      all going well, that the furnishing of his house was all the heart could
      desire—there was enough of everything and all of it good; he looked
      at his wife, and she seemed to him lovely, kind, and gentle. He was
      delighted by the glow in the east, and the young grass, and his squeaking
      chaise, and the kite. . . . And when on the way, he ran into a tavern to
      light his cigarette and drank a glass, he felt happier still.
    

      “It is said, ‘Great is the day,’” he chattered.
      “Yes, it is great! Wait a bit, Lizaveta, the sun will begin to
      dance. It dances every Easter. So it rejoices too!”
    

      “It is not alive,” said his wife.
    

      “But there are people on it!” exclaimed Tortchakov, “there
      are really! Ivan Stepanitch told me that there are people on all the
      planets—on the sun, and on the moon! Truly . . . but maybe the
      learned men tell lies—the devil only knows! Stay, surely that’s
      not a horse? Yes, it is!”
    

      At the Crooked Ravine, which was just half-way on the journey home,
      Tortchakov and his wife saw a saddled horse standing motionless, and
      sniffing last year’s dry grass. On a hillock beside the roadside a
      red-haired Cossack was sitting doubled up, looking at his feet.
    

      “Christ is risen!” Maxim shouted to him. “Wo-o-o!”
    

      “Truly He is risen,” answered the Cossack, without raising his
      head.
    

      “Where are you going?”
    

      “Home on leave.”
    

      “Why are you sitting here, then?”
    

      “Why . . . I have fallen ill . . . I haven’t the strength to
      go on.”
    

      “What is wrong?”
    

      “I ache all over.”
    

      “H’m. What a misfortune! People are keeping holiday, and you
      fall sick! But you should ride on to a village or an inn, what’s the
      use of sitting here!”
    

      The Cossack raised his head, and with big, exhausted eyes, scanned Maxim,
      his wife, and the horse.
    

      “Have you come from church?” he asked.
    

      “Yes.”
    

      “The holiday found me on the high road. It was not God’s will
      for me to reach home. I’d get on my horse at once and ride off, but
      I haven’t the strength. . . . You might, good Christians, give a
      wayfarer some Easter cake to break his fast!”
    

      “Easter cake?” Tortchakov repeated, “That we can, to be
      sure. . . . Stay, I’ll. . . .”
    

      Maxim fumbled quickly in his pockets, glanced at his wife, and said:
    

      “I haven’t a knife, nothing to cut it with. And I don’t
      like to break it, it would spoil the whole cake. There’s a problem!
      You look and see if you haven’t a knife?”
    

      The Cossack got up groaning, and went to his saddle to get a knife.
    

      “What an idea,” said Tortchakov’s wife angrily. “I
      won’t let you slice up the Easter cake! What should I look like,
      taking it home already cut! Ride on to the peasants in the village, and
      break your fast there!”
    

      The wife took the napkin with the Easter cake in it out of her husband’s
      hands and said:
    

      “I won’t allow it! One must do things properly; it’s not
      a loaf, but a holy Easter cake. And it’s a sin to cut it just
      anyhow.”
    

      “Well, Cossack, don’t be angry,” laughed Tortchakov.
      “The wife forbids it! Good-bye. Good luck on your journey!”
    

      Maxim shook the reins, clicked to his horse, and the chaise rolled on
      squeaking. For some time his wife went on grumbling, and declaring that to
      cut the Easter cake before reaching home was a sin and not the proper
      thing. In the east the first rays of the rising sun shone out, cutting
      their way through the feathery clouds, and the song of the lark was heard
      in the sky. Now not one but three kites were hovering over the steppe at a
      respectful distance from one another. Grasshoppers began churring in the
      young grass.
    

      When they had driven three-quarters of a mile from the Crooked Ravine,
      Tortchakov looked round and stared intently into the distance.
    

      “I can’t see the Cossack,” he said. “Poor, dear
      fellow, to take it into his head to fall ill on the road. There couldn’t
      be a worse misfortune, to have to travel and not have the strength. . . .
      I shouldn’t wonder if he dies by the roadside. We didn’t give
      him any Easter cake, Lizaveta, and we ought to have given it. I’ll
      be bound he wants to break his fast too.”
    

      The sun had risen, but whether it was dancing or not Tortchakov did not
      see. He remained silent all the way home, thinking and keeping his eyes
      fixed on the horse’s black tail. For some unknown reason he felt
      overcome by depression, and not a trace of the holiday gladness was left
      in his heart. When he had arrived home and said, “Christ is risen”
      to his workmen, he grew cheerful again and began talking, but when he had
      sat down to break the fast and had taken a bite from his piece of Easter
      cake, he looked regretfully at his wife, and said:
    

      “It wasn’t right of us, Lizaveta, not to give that Cossack
      something to eat.”
    

      “You are a queer one, upon my word,” said Lizaveta, shrugging
      her shoulders in surprise. “Where did you pick up such a fashion as
      giving away the holy Easter cake on the high road? Is it an ordinary loaf?
      Now that it is cut and lying on the table, let anyone eat it that likes—your
      Cossack too! Do you suppose I grudge it?”
    

      “That’s all right, but we ought to have given the Cossack
      some. . . . Why, he was worse off than a beggar or an orphan. On the road,
      and far from home, and sick too.”
    

      Tortchakov drank half a glass of tea, and neither ate nor drank anything
      more. He had no appetite, the tea seemed to choke him, and he felt
      depressed again. After breaking their fast, his wife and he lay down to
      sleep. When Lizaveta woke two hours later, he was standing by the window,
      looking into the yard.
    

      “Are you up already?” asked his wife.
    

      “I somehow can’t sleep. . . . Ah, Lizaveta,” he sighed.
      “We were unkind, you and I, to that Cossack!”
    

      “Talking about that Cossack again!” yawned his wife. “You
      have got him on the brain.”
    

      “He has served his Tsar, shed his blood maybe, and we treated him as
      though he were a pig. We ought to have brought the sick man home and fed
      him, and we did not even give him a morsel of bread.”
    

      “Catch me letting you spoil the Easter cake for nothing! And one
      that has been blessed too! You would have cut it on the road, and shouldn’t
      I have looked a fool when I got home?”
    

      Without saying anything to his wife, Maxim went into the kitchen, wrapped
      a piece of cake up in a napkin, together with half a dozen eggs, and went
      to the labourers in the barn.
    

      “Kuzma, put down your concertina,” he said to one of them.
      “Saddle the bay, or Ivantchik, and ride briskly to the Crooked
      Ravine. There you will see a sick Cossack with a horse, so give him this.
      Maybe he hasn’t ridden away yet.”
    

      Maxim felt cheerful again, but after waiting for Kuzma for some hours, he
      could bear it no longer, so he saddled a horse and went off to meet him.
      He met him just at the Ravine.
    

      “Well, have you seen the Cossack?”
    

      “I can’t find him anywhere, he must have ridden on.”
    

      “H’m . . . a queer business.”
    

      Tortchakov took the bundle from Kuzma, and galloped on farther. When he
      reached Shustrovo he asked the peasants:
    

      “Friends, have you seen a sick Cossack with a horse? Didn’t he
      ride by here? A red-headed fellow on a bay horse.”
    

      The peasants looked at one another, and said they had not seen the
      Cossack.
    

      “The returning postman drove by, it’s true, but as for a
      Cossack or anyone else, there has been no such.”
    

      Maxim got home at dinner time.
    

      “I can’t get that Cossack out of my head, do what you will!”
      he said to his wife. “He gives me no peace. I keep thinking: what if
      God meant to try us, and sent some saint or angel in the form of a
      Cossack? It does happen, you know. It’s bad, Lizaveta; we were
      unkind to the man!”
    

      “What do you keep pestering me with that Cossack for?” cried
      Lizaveta, losing patience at last. “You stick to it like tar!”
    

      “You are not kind, you know . . .” said Maxim, looking into
      his wife’s face.
    

      And for the first time since his marriage he perceived that he wife was
      not kind.
    

      “I may be unkind,” cried Lizaveta, tapping angrily with her
      spoon, “but I am not going to give away the holy Easter cake to
      every drunken man in the road.”
    

      “The Cossack wasn’t drunk!”
    

      “He was drunk!”
    

      “Well, you are a fool then!”
    

      Maxim got up from the table and began reproaching his young wife for
      hard-heartedness and stupidity. She, getting angry too, answered his
      reproaches with reproaches, burst into tears, and went away into their
      bedroom, declaring she would go home to her father’s. This was the
      first matrimonial squabble that had happened in the Tortchakov’s
      married life. He walked about the yard till the evening, picturing his
      wife’s face, and it seemed to him now spiteful and ugly. And as
      though to torment him the Cossack haunted his brain, and Maxim seemed to
      see now his sick eyes, now his unsteady walk.
    

      “Ah, we were unkind to the man,” he muttered.
    

      When it got dark, he was overcome by an insufferable depression such as he
      had never felt before. Feeling so dreary, and being angry with his wife,
      he got drunk, as he had sometimes done before he was married. In his
      drunkenness he used bad language and shouted to his wife that she had a
      spiteful, ugly face, and that next day he would send her packing to her
      father’s. On the morning of Easter Monday, he drank some more to
      sober himself, and got drunk again.
    

      And with that his downfall began.
    

      His horses, cows, sheep, and hives disappeared one by one from the yard;
      Maxim was more and more often drunk, debts mounted up, he felt an aversion
      for his wife. Maxim put down all his misfortunes to the fact that he had
      an unkind wife, and above all, that God was angry with him on account of
      the sick Cossack.
    

      Lizaveta saw their ruin, but who was to blame for it she did not
      understand.
    











      ABORIGINES
    

BETWEEN nine and
      ten in the morning. Ivan Lyashkevsky, a lieutenant of Polish origin, who
      has at some time or other been wounded in the head, and now lives on his
      pension in a town in one of the southern provinces, is sitting in his
      lodgings at the open window talking to Franz Stepanitch Finks, the town
      architect, who has come in to see him for a minute. Both have thrust their
      heads out of the window, and are looking in the direction of the gate near
      which Lyashkevsky’s landlord, a plump little native with pendulous
      perspiring cheeks, in full, blue trousers, is sitting on a bench with his
      waistcoat unbuttoned. The native is plunged in deep thought, and is
      absent-mindedly prodding the toe of his boot with a stick.
    

      “Extraordinary people, I tell you,” grumbled Lyashkevsky,
      looking angrily at the native, “here he has sat down on the bench,
      and so he will sit, damn the fellow, with his hands folded till evening.
      They do absolutely nothing. The wastrels and loafers! It would be all
      right, you scoundrel, if you had money lying in the bank, or had a farm of
      your own where others would be working for you, but here you have not a
      penny to your name, you eat the bread of others, you are in debt all
      round, and you starve your family—devil take you! You wouldn’t
      believe me, Franz Stepanitch, sometimes it makes me so cross that I could
      jump out of the window and give the low fellow a good horse-whipping.
      Come, why don’t you work? What are you sitting there for?”
    

      The native looks indifferently at Lyashkevsky, tries to say something but
      cannot; sloth and the sultry heat have paralysed his conversational
      faculties. . . . Yawning lazily, he makes the sign of the cross over his
      mouth, and turns his eyes up towards the sky where pigeons fly, bathing in
      the hot air.
    

      “You must not be too severe in your judgments, honoured friend,”
      sighs Finks, mopping his big bald head with his handkerchief. “Put
      yourself in their place: business is slack now, there’s unemployment
      all round, a bad harvest, stagnation in trade.”
    

      “Good gracious, how you talk!” cries Lyashkevsky in
      indignation, angrily wrapping his dressing gown round him. “Supposing
      he has no job and no trade, why doesn’t he work in his own home, the
      devil flay him! I say! Is there no work for you at home? Just look, you
      brute! Your steps have come to pieces, the plankway is falling into the
      ditch, the fence is rotten; you had better set to and mend it all, or if
      you don’t know how, go into the kitchen and help your wife. Your
      wife is running out every minute to fetch water or carry out the slops.
      Why shouldn’t you run instead, you rascal? And then you must
      remember, Franz Stepanitch, that he has six acres of garden, that he has
      pigsties and poultry houses, but it is all wasted and no use. The flower
      garden is overgrown with weeds and almost baked dry, while the boys play
      ball in the kitchen garden. Isn’t he a lazy brute? I assure you,
      though I have only the use of an acre and a half with my lodgings, you
      will always find radishes, and salad, and fennel, and onions, while that
      blackguard buys everything at the market.”
    

      “He is a Russian, there is no doing anything with him,” said
      Finks with a condescending smile; “it’s in the Russian blood.
      . . . They are a very lazy people! If all property were given to Germans
      or Poles, in a year’s time you would not recognise the town.”
    

      The native in the blue trousers beckons a girl with a sieve, buys a kopeck’s
      worth of sunflower seeds from her and begins cracking them.
    

      “A race of curs!” says Lyashkevsky angrily. “That’s
      their only occupation, they crack sunflower seeds and they talk politics!
      The devil take them!”
    

      Staring wrathfully at the blue trousers, Lyashkevsky is gradually roused
      to fury, and gets so excited that he actually foams at the mouth. He
      speaks with a Polish accent, rapping out each syllable venomously, till at
      last the little bags under his eyes swell, and he abandons the Russian
      “scoundrels, blackguards, and rascals,” and rolling his eyes,
      begins pouring out a shower of Polish oaths, coughing from his efforts.
      “Lazy dogs, race of curs. May the devil take them!”
    

      The native hears this abuse distinctly, but, judging from the appearance
      of his crumpled little figure, it does not affect him. Apparently he has
      long ago grown as used to it as to the buzzing of the flies, and feels it
      superfluous to protest. At every visit Finks has to listen to a tirade on
      the subject of the lazy good-for-nothing aborigines, and every time
      exactly the same one.
    

      “But . . . I must be going,” he says, remembering that he has
      no time to spare. “Good-bye!”
    

      “Where are you off to?”
    

      “I only looked in on you for a minute. The wall of the cellar has
      cracked in the girls’ high school, so they asked me to go round at
      once to look at it. I must go.”
    

      “H’m. . . . I have told Varvara to get the samovar,”
      says Lyashkevsky, surprised. “Stay a little, we will have some tea;
      then you shall go.”
    

      Finks obediently puts down his hat on the table and remains to drink tea.
      Over their tea Lyashkevsky maintains that the natives are hopelessly
      ruined, that there is only one thing to do, to take them all
      indiscriminately and send them under strict escort to hard labour.
    

      “Why, upon my word,” he says, getting hot, “you may ask
      what does that goose sitting there live upon! He lets me lodgings in his
      house for seven roubles a month, and he goes to name-day parties, that’s
      all that he has to live on, the knave, may the devil take him! He has
      neither earnings nor an income. They are not merely sluggards and
      wastrels, they are swindlers too, they are continually borrowing money
      from the town bank, and what do they do with it? They plunge into some
      scheme such as sending bulls to Moscow, or building oil presses on a new
      system; but to send bulls to Moscow or to press oil you want to have a
      head on your shoulders, and these rascals have pumpkins on theirs! Of
      course all their schemes end in smoke . . . . They waste their money, get
      into a mess, and then snap their fingers at the bank. What can you get out
      of them? Their houses are mortgaged over and over again, they have no
      other property—it’s all been drunk and eaten up long ago.
      Nine-tenths of them are swindlers, the scoundrels! To borrow money and not
      return it is their rule. Thanks to them the town bank is going smash!”
    

      “I was at Yegorov’s yesterday,” Finks interrupts the
      Pole, anxious to change the conversation, “and only fancy, I won six
      roubles and a half from him at picquet.”
    

      “I believe I still owe you something at picquet,” Lyashkevsky
      recollects, “I ought to win it back. Wouldn’t you like one
      game?”
    

      “Perhaps just one,” Finks assents. “I must make haste to
      the high school, you know.”
    

      Lyashkevsky and Finks sit down at the open window and begin a game of
      picquet. The native in the blue trousers stretches with relish, and husks
      of sunflower seeds fall in showers from all over him on to the ground. At
      that moment from the gate opposite appears another native with a long
      beard, wearing a crumpled yellowish-grey cotton coat. He screws up his
      eyes affectionately at the blue trousers and shouts:
    

      “Good-morning, Semyon Nikolaitch, I have the honour to congratulate
      you on the Thursday.”
    

      “And the same to you, Kapiton Petrovitch!”
    

      “Come to my seat! It’s cool here!”
    

      The blue trousers, with much sighing and groaning and waddling from side
      to side like a duck, cross the street.
    

      “Tierce major . . .” mutters Lyashkevsky, “from the
      queen. . . . Five and fifteen. . . . The rascals are talking of politics.
      . . . Do you hear? They have begun about England. I have six hearts.”
    

      “I have the seven spades. My point.”
    

      “Yes, it’s yours. Do you hear? They are abusing Beaconsfield.
      They don’t know, the swine, that Beaconsfield has been dead for ever
      so long. So I have twenty-nine. . . . Your lead.”
    

      “Eight . . . nine . . . ten . . . . Yes, amazing people, these
      Russians! Eleven . . . twelve. . . . The Russian inertia is unique on the
      terrestrial globe.”
    

      “Thirty . . . Thirty-one. . . . One ought to take a good whip, you
      know. Go out and give them Beaconsfield. I say, how their tongues are
      wagging! It’s easier to babble than to work. I suppose you threw
      away the queen of clubs and I didn’t realise it.”
    

      “Thirteen . . . Fourteen. . . . It’s unbearably hot! One must
      be made of iron to sit in such heat on a seat in the full sun! Fifteen.”
    

      The first game is followed by a second, the second by a third. . . . Finks
      loses, and by degrees works himself up into a gambling fever and forgets
      all about the cracking walls of the high school cellar. As Lyashkevsky
      plays he keeps looking at the aborigines. He sees them, entertaining each
      other with conversation, go to the open gate, cross the filthy yard and
      sit down on a scanty patch of shade under an aspen tree. Between twelve
      and one o’clock the fat cook with brown legs spreads before them
      something like a baby’s sheet with brown stains upon it, and gives
      them their dinner. They eat with wooden spoons, keep brushing away the
      flies, and go on talking.
    

      “The devil, it is beyond everything,” cries Lyashkevsky,
      revolted. “I am very glad I have not a gun or a revolver or I should
      have a shot at those cattle. I have four knaves—fourteen. . . . Your
      point. . . . It really gives me a twitching in my legs. I can’t see
      those ruffians without being upset.”
    

      “Don’t excite yourself, it is bad for you.”
    

      “But upon my word, it is enough to try the patience of a stone!”
    

      When he has finished dinner the native in blue trousers, worn out and
      exhausted, staggering with laziness and repletion, crosses the street to
      his own house and sinks feebly on to his bench. He is struggling with
      drowsiness and the gnats, and is looking about him as dejectedly as though
      he were every minute expecting his end. His helpless air drives
      Lyashkevsky out of all patience. The Pole pokes his head out of the window
      and shouts at him, spluttering:
    

      “Been gorging? Ah, the old woman! The sweet darling. He has been
      stuffing himself, and now he doesn’t know what to do with his tummy!
      Get out of my sight, you confounded fellow! Plague take you!”
    

      The native looks sourly at him, and merely twiddles his fingers instead of
      answering. A school-boy of his acquaintance passes by him with his satchel
      on his back. Stopping him the native ponders a long time what to say to
      him, and asks:
    

      “Well, what now?”
    

      “Nothing.”
    

      “How, nothing?”
    

      “Why, just nothing.”
    

      “H’m. . . . And which subject is the hardest?”
    

      “That’s according.” The school-boy shrugs his shoulders.
    

      “I see—er . . . What is the Latin for tree?”
    

      “Arbor.”
    

      “Aha. . . . And so one has to know all that,” sighs the blue
      trousers. “You have to go into it all. . . . It’s hard work,
      hard work. . . . Is your dear Mamma well?”
    

      “She is all right, thank you.”
    

      “Ah. . . . Well, run along.”
    

      After losing two roubles Finks remembers the high school and is horrified.
    

      “Holy Saints, why it’s three o’clock already. How I have
      been staying on. Good-bye, I must run. . . .”
    

      “Have dinner with me, and then go,” says Lyashkevsky. “You
      have plenty of time.”
    

      Finks stays, but only on condition that dinner shall last no more than ten
      minutes. After dining he sits for some five minutes on the sofa and thinks
      of the cracked wall, then resolutely lays his head on the cushion and
      fills the room with a shrill whistling through his nose. While he is
      asleep, Lyashkevsky, who does not approve of an afternoon nap, sits at the
      window, stares at the dozing native, and grumbles:
    

      “Race of curs! I wonder you don’t choke with laziness. No
      work, no intellectual or moral interests, nothing but vegetating . . . .
      disgusting. Tfoo!”
    

      At six o’clock Finks wakes up.
    

      “It’s too late to go to the high school now,” he says,
      stretching. “I shall have to go to-morrow, and now. . . . How about
      my revenge? Let’s have one more game. . . .”
    

      After seeing his visitor off, between nine and ten, Lyashkevsky looks
      after him for some time, and says:
    

      “Damn the fellow, staying here the whole day and doing absolutely
      nothing. . . . Simply get their salary and do no work; the devil take
      them! . . . The German pig. . . .”
    

      He looks out of the window, but the native is no longer there. He has gone
      to bed. There is no one to grumble at, and for the first time in the day
      he keeps his mouth shut, but ten minutes passes and he cannot restrain the
      depression that overpowers him, and begins to grumble, shoving the old
      shabby armchair:
    

      “You only take up room, rubbishly old thing! You ought to have been
      burnt long ago, but I keep forgetting to tell them to chop you up. It’s
      a disgrace!”
    

      And as he gets into bed he presses his hand on a spring of the mattress,
      frowns and says peevishly:
    

      “The con—found—ed spring! It will cut my side all night.
      I will tell them to rip up the mattress to-morrow and get you out, you
      useless thing.”
    

      He falls asleep at midnight, and dreams that he is pouring boiling water
      over the natives, Finks, and the old armchair.
    











      AN INQUIRY
    

IT was midday.
      Voldyrev, a tall, thick-set country gentleman with a cropped head and
      prominent eyes, took off his overcoat, mopped his brow with his silk
      handkerchief, and somewhat diffidently went into the government office.
      There they were scratching away. . . .
    

      “Where can I make an inquiry here?” he said, addressing a
      porter who was bringing a trayful of glasses from the furthest recesses of
      the office. “I have to make an inquiry here and to take a copy of a
      resolution of the Council.”
    

      “That way please! To that one sitting near the window!” said
      the porter, indicating with the tray the furthest window. Voldyrev coughed
      and went towards the window; there, at a green table spotted like typhus,
      was sitting a young man with his hair standing up in four tufts on his
      head, with a long pimply nose, and a long faded uniform. He was writing,
      thrusting his long nose into the papers. A fly was walking about near his
      right nostril, and he was continually stretching out his lower lip and
      blowing under his nose, which gave his face an extremely care-worn
      expression.
    

      “May I make an inquiry about my case here . . . of you? My name is
      Voldyrev. And, by the way, I have to take a copy of the resolution of the
      Council of the second of March.”
    

      The clerk dipped his pen in the ink and looked to see if he had got too
      much on it. Having satisfied himself that the pen would not make a blot,
      he began scribbling away. His lip was thrust out, but it was no longer
      necessary to blow: the fly had settled on his ear.
    

      “Can I make an inquiry here?” Voldyrev repeated a minute
      later, “my name is Voldyrev, I am a landowner. . . .”
    

      “Ivan Alexeitch!” the clerk shouted into the air as though he
      had not observed Voldyrev, “will you tell the merchant Yalikov when
      he comes to sign the copy of the complaint lodged with the police! I’ve
      told him a thousand times!”
    

      “I have come in reference to my lawsuit with the heirs of Princess
      Gugulin,” muttered Voldyrev. “The case is well known. I
      earnestly beg you to attend to me.”
    

      Still failing to observe Voldyrev, the clerk caught the fly on his lip,
      looked at it attentively and flung it away. The country gentleman coughed
      and blew his nose loudly on his checked pocket handkerchief. But this was
      no use either. He was still unheard. The silence lasted for two minutes.
      Voldyrev took a rouble note from his pocket and laid it on an open book
      before the clerk. The clerk wrinkled up his forehead, drew the book
      towards him with an anxious air and closed it.
    

      “A little inquiry. . . . I want only to find out on what grounds the
      heirs of Princess Gugulin. . . . May I trouble you?”
    

      The clerk, absorbed in his own thoughts, got up and, scratching his elbow,
      went to a cupboard for something. Returning a minute later to his table he
      became absorbed in the book again: another rouble note was lying upon it.
    

      “I will trouble you for one minute only. . . . I have only to make
      an inquiry.”
    

      The clerk did not hear, he had begun copying something.
    

      Voldyrev frowned and looked hopelessly at the whole scribbling
      brotherhood.
    

      “They write!” he thought, sighing. “They write, the
      devil take them entirely!”
    

      He walked away from the table and stopped in the middle of the room, his
      hands hanging hopelessly at his sides. The porter, passing again with
      glasses, probably noticed the helpless expression of his face, for he went
      close up to him and asked him in a low voice:
    

      “Well? Have you inquired?”
    

      “I’ve inquired, but he wouldn’t speak to me.”
    

      “You give him three roubles,” whispered the porter.
    

      “I’ve given him two already.”
    

      “Give him another.”
    

      Voldyrev went back to the table and laid a green note on the open book.
    

      The clerk drew the book towards him again and began turning over the
      leaves, and all at once, as though by chance, lifted his eyes to Voldyrev.
      His nose began to shine, turned red, and wrinkled up in a grin.
    

      “Ah . . . what do you want?” he asked.
    

      “I want to make an inquiry in reference to my case. . . . My name is
      Voldyrev.”
    

      “With pleasure! The Gugulin case, isn’t it? Very good. What is
      it then exactly?”
    

      Voldyrev explained his business.
    

      The clerk became as lively as though he were whirled round by a hurricane.
      He gave the necessary information, arranged for a copy to be made, gave
      the petitioner a chair, and all in one instant. He even spoke about the
      weather and asked after the harvest. And when Voldyrev went away he
      accompanied him down the stairs, smiling affably and respectfully, and
      looking as though he were ready any minute to fall on his face before the
      gentleman. Voldyrev for some reason felt uncomfortable, and in obedience
      to some inward impulse he took a rouble out of his pocket and gave it to
      the clerk. And the latter kept bowing and smiling, and took the rouble
      like a conjuror, so that it seemed to flash through the air.
    

      “Well, what people!” thought the country gentleman as he went
      out into the street, and he stopped and mopped his brow with his
      handkerchief.
    











      MARTYRS
    

LIZOTCHKA
      KUDRINSKY, a young married lady who had many admirers, was suddenly taken
      ill, and so seriously that her husband did not go to his office, and a
      telegram was sent to her mamma at Tver. This is how she told the story of
      her illness:
    

      “I went to Lyesnoe to auntie’s. I stayed there a week and then
      I went with all the rest to cousin Varya’s. Varya’s husband is
      a surly brute and a despot (I’d shoot a husband like that), but we
      had a very jolly time there. To begin with I took part in some private
      theatricals. It was A Scandal in a Respectable Family. Hrustalev
      acted marvellously! Between the acts I drank some cold, awfully cold,
      lemon squash, with the tiniest nip of brandy in it. Lemon squash with
      brandy in it is very much like champagne. . . . I drank it and I felt
      nothing. Next day after the performance I rode out on horseback with that
      Adolf Ivanitch. It was rather damp and there was a strong wind. It was
      most likely then that I caught cold. Three days later I came home to see
      how my dear, good Vassya was getting on, and while here to get my silk
      dress, the one that has little flowers on it. Vassya, of course, I did not
      find at home. I went into the kitchen to tell Praskovya to set the
      samovar, and there I saw on the table some pretty little carrots and
      turnips like playthings. I ate one little carrot and well, a turnip too. I
      ate very little, but only fancy, I began having a sharp pain at once—spasms
      . . . spasms . . . spasms . . . ah, I am dying. Vassya runs from the
      office. Naturally he clutches at his hair and turns white. They run for
      the doctor. . . . Do you understand, I am dying, dying.”
    

      The spasms began at midday, before three o’clock the doctor came,
      and at six Lizotchka fell asleep and slept soundly till two o’clock
      in the morning.
    

      It strikes two. . . . The light of the little night lamp filters scantily
      through the pale blue shade. Lizotchka is lying in bed, her white lace cap
      stands out sharply against the dark background of the red cushion. Shadows
      from the blue lamp-shade lie in patterns on her pale face and her round
      plump shoulders. Vassily Stepanovitch is sitting at her feet. The poor
      fellow is happy that his wife is at home at last, and at the same time he
      is terribly alarmed by her illness.
    

      “Well, how do you feel, Lizotchka?” he asks in a whisper,
      noticing that she is awake.
    

      “I am better,” moans Lizotchka. “I don’t feel the
      spasms now, but there is no sleeping. . . . I can’t get to sleep!”
    

      “Isn’t it time to change the compress, my angel?”
    

      Lizotchka sits up slowly with the expression of a martyr and gracefully
      turns her head on one side. Vassily Stepanovitch with reverent awe,
      scarcely touching her hot body with his fingers, changes the compress.
      Lizotchka shrinks, laughs at the cold water which tickles her, and lies
      down again.
    

      “You are getting no sleep, poor boy!” she moans.
    

      “As though I could sleep!”
    

      “It’s my nerves, Vassya, I am a very nervous woman. The doctor
      has prescribed for stomach trouble, but I feel that he doesn’t
      understand my illness. It’s nerves and not the stomach, I swear that
      it is my nerves. There is only one thing I am afraid of, that my illness
      may take a bad turn.”
    

      “No, Lizotchka, no, to-morrow you will be all right!”
    

      “Hardly likely! I am not afraid for myself. . . . I don’t
      care, indeed, I shall be glad to die, but I am sorry for you! You’ll
      be a widower and left all alone.”
    

      Vassitchka rarely enjoys his wife’s society, and has long been used
      to solitude, but Lizotchka’s words agitate him.
    

      “Goodness knows what you are saying, little woman! Why these gloomy
      thoughts?”
    

      “Well, you will cry and grieve, and then you will get used to it.
      You’ll even get married again.”
    

      The husband clutches his head.
    

      “There, there, I won’t!” Lizotchka soothes him, “only
      you ought to be prepared for anything.”
    

      “And all of a sudden I shall die,” she thinks, shutting her
      eyes.
    

      And Lizotchka draws a mental picture of her own death, how her mother, her
      husband, her cousin Varya with her husband, her relations, the admirers of
      her “talent” press round her death bed, as she whispers her
      last farewell. All are weeping. Then when she is dead they dress her,
      interestingly pale and dark-haired, in a pink dress (it suits her) and lay
      her in a very expensive coffin on gold legs, full of flowers. There is a
      smell of incense, the candles splutter. Her husband never leaves the
      coffin, while the admirers of her talent cannot take their eyes off her,
      and say: “As though living! She is lovely in her coffin!” The
      whole town is talking of the life cut short so prematurely. But now they
      are carrying her to the church. The bearers are Ivan Petrovitch, Adolf
      Ivanitch, Varya’s husband, Nikolay Semyonitch, and the black-eyed
      student who had taught her to drink lemon squash with brandy. It’s
      only a pity there’s no music playing. After the burial service comes
      the leave-taking. The church is full of sobs, they bring the lid with
      tassels, and . . . Lizotchka is shut off from the light of day for ever,
      there is the sound of hammering nails. Knock, knock, knock.
    

      Lizotchka shudders and opens her eyes.
    

      “Vassya, are you here?” she asks. “I have such gloomy
      thoughts. Goodness, why am I so unlucky as not to sleep. Vassya, have
      pity, do tell me something!”
    

      “What shall I tell you?”
    

      “Something about love,” Lizotchka says languidly. “Or
      some anecdote about Jews. . . .”
    

      Vassily Stepanovitch, ready for anything if only his wife will be cheerful
      and not talk about death, combs locks of hair over his ears, makes an
      absurd face, and goes up to Lizotchka.
    

      “Does your vatch vant mending?” he asks.
    

      “It does, it does,” giggles Lizotchka, and hands him her gold
      watch from the little table. “Mend it.”
    

      Vassya takes the watch, examines the mechanism for a long time, and
      wriggling and shrugging, says: “She can not be mended . . . in vun
      veel two cogs are vanting. . . .”
    

      This is the whole performance. Lizotchka laughs and claps her hands.
    

      “Capital,” she exclaims. “Wonderful. Do you know,
      Vassya, it’s awfully stupid of you not to take part in amateur
      theatricals! You have a remarkable talent! You are much better than
      Sysunov. There was an amateur called Sysunov who played with us in It’s
      My Birthday. A first-class comic talent, only fancy: a nose as thick
      as a parsnip, green eyes, and he walks like a crane. . . . We all roared;
      stay, I will show you how he walks.”
    

      Lizotchka springs out of bed and begins pacing about the floor, barefooted
      and without her cap.
    

      “A very good day to you!” she says in a bass, imitating a man’s
      voice. “Anything pretty? Anything new under the moon? Ha, ha, ha!”
      she laughs.
    

      “Ha, ha, ha!” Vassya seconds her. And the young pair, roaring
      with laughter, forgetting the illness, chase one another about the room.
      The race ends in Vassya’s catching his wife by her nightgown and
      eagerly showering kisses upon her. After one particularly passionate
      embrace Lizotchka suddenly remembers that she is seriously ill. . . .
    

      “What silliness!” she says, making a serious face and covering
      herself with the quilt. “I suppose you have forgotten that I am ill!
      Clever, I must say!”
    

      “Sorry . . .” falters her husband in confusion.
    

      “If my illness takes a bad turn it will be your fault. Not kind! not
      good!”
    

      Lizotchka closes her eyes and is silent. Her former languor and expression
      of martyrdom return again, there is a sound of gentle moans. Vassya
      changes the compress, and glad that his wife is at home and not gadding
      off to her aunt’s, sits meekly at her feet. He does not sleep all
      night. At ten o’clock the doctor comes.
    

      “Well, how are we feeling?” he asks as he takes her pulse.
      “Have you slept?”
    

      “Badly,” Lizotchka’s husband answers for her, “very
      badly.”
    

      The doctor walks away to the window and stares at a passing chimney-sweep.
    

      “Doctor, may I have coffee to-day?” asks Lizotchka.
    

      “You may.”
    

      “And may I get up?”
    

      “You might, perhaps, but . . . you had better lie in bed another
      day.”
    

      “She is awfully depressed,” Vassya whispers in his ear,
      “such gloomy thoughts, such pessimism. I am dreadfully uneasy about
      her.”
    

      The doctor sits down to the little table, and rubbing his forehead,
      prescribes bromide of potassium for Lizotchka, then makes his bow, and
      promising to look in again in the evening, departs. Vassya does not go to
      the office, but sits all day at his wife’s feet.
    

      At midday the admirers of her talent arrive in a crowd. They are agitated
      and alarmed, they bring masses of flowers and French novels. Lizotchka, in
      a snow-white cap and a light dressing jacket, lies in bed with an
      enigmatic look, as though she did not believe in her own recovery. The
      admirers of her talent see her husband, but readily forgive his presence:
      they and he are united by one calamity at that bedside!
    

      At six o’clock in the evening Lizotchka falls asleep, and again
      sleeps till two o’clock in the morning. Vassya as before sits at her
      feet, struggles with drowsiness, changes her compress, plays at being a
      Jew, and in the morning after a second night of suffering, Liza is
      prinking before the looking-glass and putting on her hat.
    

      “Wherever are you going, my dear?” asks Vassya, with an
      imploring look at her.
    

      “What?” says Lizotchka in wonder, assuming a scared
      expression, “don’t you know that there is a rehearsal to-day
      at Marya Lvovna’s?”
    

      After escorting her there, Vassya having nothing to do to while away his
      boredom, takes his portfolio and goes to the office. His head aches so
      violently from his sleepless nights that his left eye shuts of itself and
      refuses to open. . . .
    

      “What’s the matter with you, my good sir?” his chief
      asks him. “What is it?”
    

      Vassya waves his hand and sits down.
    

      “Don’t ask me, your Excellency,” he says with a sigh.
      “What I have suffered in these two days, what I have suffered! Liza
      has been ill!”
    

      “Good heavens,” cried his chief in alarm. “Lizaveta
      Pavlovna, what is wrong with her?”
    

      Vassily Stepanovitch merely throws up his hands and raises his eyes to the
      ceiling, as though he would say: “It’s the will of Providence.”
    

      “Ah, my boy, I can sympathise with you with all my heart!”
      sighs his chief, rolling his eyes. “I’ve lost my wife, my
      dear, I understand. That is a loss, it is a loss! It’s awful, awful!
      I hope Lizaveta Pavlovna is better now! What doctor is attending her?”
    

      “Von Schterk.”
    

      “Von Schterk! But you would have been better to have called in
      Magnus or Semandritsky. But how very pale your face is. You are ill
      yourself! This is awful!”
    

      “Yes, your Excellency, I haven’t slept. What I have suffered,
      what I have been through!”
    

      “And yet you came! Why you came I can’t understand? One can’t
      force oneself like that! One mustn’t do oneself harm like that. Go
      home and stay there till you are well again! Go home, I command you! Zeal
      is a very fine thing in a young official, but you mustn’t forget as
      the Romans used to say: ‘mens sana in corpore sano,’ that is,
      a healthy brain in a healthy body.”
    

      Vassya agrees, puts his papers back in his portfolio, and, taking leave of
      his chief, goes home to bed.
    











      THE LION AND THE SUN
    

IN one of the towns
      lying on this side of the Urals a rumour was afloat that a Persian
      magnate, called Rahat-Helam, was staying for a few days in the town and
      putting up at the “Japan Hotel.” This rumour made no
      impression whatever upon the inhabitants; a Persian had arrived, well, so
      be it. Only Stepan Ivanovitch Kutsyn, the mayor of the town, hearing of
      the arrival of the oriental gentleman from the secretary of the Town Hall,
      grew thoughtful and inquired:
    

      “Where is he going?”
    

      “To Paris or to London, I believe.”
    

      “H’m. . . . Then he is a big-wig, I suppose?”
    

      “The devil only knows.”
    

      As he went home from the Town Hall and had his dinner, the mayor sank into
      thought again, and this time he went on thinking till the evening. The
      arrival of the distinguished Persian greatly intrigued him. It seemed to
      him that fate itself had sent him this Rahat-Helam, and that a favourable
      opportunity had come at last for realising his passionate, secretly
      cherished dream. Kutsyn had already two medals, and the Stanislav of the
      third degree, the badge of the Red Cross, and the badge of the Society of
      Saving from Drowning, and in addition to these he had made himself a
      little gold gun crossed by a guitar, and this ornament, hung from a
      buttonhole in his uniform, looked in the distance like something special,
      and delightfully resembled a badge of distinction. It is well known that
      the more orders and medals you have the more you want—and the mayor
      had long been desirous of receiving the Persian order of The Lion and the
      Sun; he desired it passionately, madly. He knew very well that there was
      no need to fight, or to subscribe to an asylum, or to serve on committees
      to obtain this order; all that was needed was a favourable opportunity.
      And now it seemed to him that this opportunity had come.
    

      At noon on the following day he put on his chain and all his badges of
      distinction and went to the ‘Japan.’ Destiny favoured him.
      When he entered the distinguished Persian’s apartment the latter was
      alone and doing nothing. Rahat-Helam, an enormous Asiatic, with a long
      nose like the beak of a snipe, with prominent eyes, and with a fez on his
      head, was sitting on the floor rummaging in his portmanteau.
    

      “I beg you to excuse my disturbing you,” began Kutsyn,
      smiling. “I have the honour to introduce myself, the hereditary,
      honourable citizen and cavalier, Stepan Ivanovitch Kutsyn, mayor of this
      town. I regard it as my duty to honour, in the person of your Highness, so
      to say, the representative of a friendly and neighbourly state.”
    

      The Persian turned and muttered something in very bad French, that sounded
      like tapping a board with a piece of wood.
    

      “The frontiers of Persia”—Kutsyn continued the greeting
      he had previously learned by heart—“are in close contact with
      the borders of our spacious fatherland, and therefore mutual sympathies
      impel me, so to speak, to express my solidarity with you.”
    

      The illustrious Persian got up and again muttered something in a wooden
      tongue. Kutsyn, who knew no foreign language, shook his head to show that
      he did not understand.
    

      “Well, how am I to talk to him?” he thought. “It would
      be a good thing to send for an interpreter at once, but it is a delicate
      matter, I can’t talk before witnesses. The interpreter would be
      chattering all over the town afterwards.”
    

      And Kutsyn tried to recall the foreign words he had picked up from the
      newspapers.
    

      “I am the mayor of the town,” he muttered. “That is the
      lord mayor . . . municipalais . . . Vwee? Kompreney?”
    

      He wanted to express his social position in words or in gesture, and did
      not know how. A picture hanging on the wall with an inscription in large
      letters, “The Town of Venice,” helped him out of his
      difficulties. He pointed with his finger at the town, then at his own
      head, and in that way obtained, as he imagined, the phrase: “I am
      the head of the town.” The Persian did not understand, but he gave a
      smile, and said:
    

      “Goot, monsieur . . . goot . . . . .” Half-an-hour later the
      mayor was slapping the Persian, first on the knee and then on the
      shoulder, and saying:
    

      “Kompreney? Vwee? As lord mayor and municipalais I
      suggest that you should take a little promenage . . . kompreney?
      Promenage.”
    

      Kutsyn pointed at Venice, and with two fingers represented walking legs.
      Rahat-Helam who kept his eyes fixed on his medals, and was apparently
      guessing that this was the most important person in the town, understood
      the word promenage and grinned politely. Then they both put on
      their coats and went out of the room. Downstairs near the door leading to
      the restaurant of the ‘Japan,’ Kutsyn reflected that it would
      not be amiss to entertain the Persian. He stopped and indicating the
      tables, said:
    

      “By Russian custom it wouldn’t be amiss . . . puree,
      entrekot, champagne and so on, kompreney.”
    

      The illustrious visitor understood, and a little later they were both
      sitting in the very best room of the restaurant, eating, and drinking
      champagne.
    

      “Let us drink to the prosperity of Persia!” said Kutsyn.
      “We Russians love the Persians. Though we are of another faith, yet
      there are common interests, mutual, so to say, sympathies . . . progress .
      . . Asiatic markets. . . . The campaigns of peace so to say. . . .”
    

      The illustrious Persian ate and drank with an excellent appetite, he stuck
      his fork into a slice of smoked sturgeon, and wagging his head,
      enthusiastically said: “Goot, bien.”
    

      “You like it?” said the mayor delighted. “Bien,
      that’s capital.” And turning to the waiter he said: “Luka,
      my lad, see that two pieces of smoked sturgeon, the best you have, are
      sent up to his Highness’s room!”
    

      Then the mayor and the Persian magnate went to look at the menagerie. The
      townspeople saw their Stepan Ivanovitch, flushed with champagne, gay and
      very well pleased, leading the Persian about the principal streets and the
      bazaar, showing him the points of interest of the town, and even taking
      him to the fire tower.
    

      Among other things the townspeople saw him stop near some stone gates with
      lions on it, and point out to the Persian first the lion, then the sun
      overhead, and then his own breast; then again he pointed to the lion and
      to the sun while the Persian nodded his head as though in sign of assent,
      and smiling showed his white teeth. In the evening they were sitting in
      the London Hotel listening to the harp-players, and where they spent the
      night is not known.
    

      Next day the mayor was at the Town Hall in the morning; the officials
      there apparently already knew something and were making their conjectures,
      for the secretary went up to him and said with an ironical smile:
    

      “It is the custom of the Persians when an illustrious visitor comes
      to visit you, you must slaughter a sheep with your own hands.”
    

      And a little later an envelope that had come by post was handed to him.
      The mayor tore it open and saw a caricature in it. It was a drawing of
      Rahat-Helam with the mayor on his knees before him, stretching out his
      hands and saying:
    

            “To prove our Russian friendship
             For Persia’s mighty realm,
             And show respect for you, her envoy,
             Myself I’d slaughter like a lamb,
             But, pardon me, for I’m a—donkey!”
 

      The mayor was conscious of an unpleasant feeling like a gnawing in the pit
      of the stomach, but not for long. By midday he was again with the
      illustrious Persian, again he was regaling him and showing him the points
      of interest in the town. Again he led him to the stone gates, and again
      pointed to the lion, to the sun and to his own breast. They dined at the
      ‘Japan’; after dinner, with cigars in their teeth, both,
      flushed and blissful, again mounted the fire tower, and the mayor,
      evidently wishing to entertain the visitor with an unusual spectacle,
      shouted from the top to a sentry walking below:
    

      “Sound the alarm!”
    

      But the alarm was not sounded as the firemen were at the baths at the
      moment.
    

      They supped at the ‘London’ and, after supper, the Persian
      departed. When he saw him off, Stepan Ivanovitch kissed him three times
      after the Russian fashion, and even grew tearful. And when the train
      started, he shouted:
    

      “Give our greeting to Persia! Tell her that we love her!”
    

      A year and four months had passed. There was a bitter frost, thirty-five
      degrees, and a piercing wind was blowing. Stepan Ivanovitch was walking
      along the street with his fur coat thrown open over his chest, and he was
      annoyed that he met no one to see the Lion and the Sun upon his breast. He
      walked about like this till evening with his fur coat open, was chilled to
      the bone, and at night tossed from side to side and could not get to
      sleep.
    

      He felt heavy at heart.
    

      There was a burning sensation inside him, and his heart throbbed uneasily;
      he had a longing now to get a Serbian order. It was a painful, passionate
      longing.
    











      A DAUGHTER OF ALBION
    

A FINE carriage
      with rubber tyres, a fat coachman, and velvet on the seats, rolled up to
      the house of a landowner called Gryabov. Fyodor Andreitch Otsov, the
      district Marshal of Nobility, jumped out of the carriage. A drowsy footman
      met him in the hall.
    

      “Are the family at home?” asked the Marshal.
    

      “No, sir. The mistress and the children are gone out paying visits,
      while the master and mademoiselle are catching fish. Fishing all the
      morning, sir.”
    

      Otsov stood a little, thought a little, and then went to the river to look
      for Gryabov. Going down to the river he found him a mile and a half from
      the house. Looking down from the steep bank and catching sight of Gryabov,
      Otsov gushed with laughter. . . . Gryabov, a large stout man, with a very
      big head, was sitting on the sand, angling, with his legs tucked under him
      like a Turk. His hat was on the back of his head and his cravat had
      slipped on one side. Beside him stood a tall thin Englishwoman, with
      prominent eyes like a crab’s, and a big bird-like nose more like a
      hook than a nose. She was dressed in a white muslin gown through which her
      scraggy yellow shoulders were very distinctly apparent. On her gold belt
      hung a little gold watch. She too was angling. The stillness of the grave
      reigned about them both. Both were motionless, as the river upon which
      their floats were swimming.
    

      “A desperate passion, but deadly dull!” laughed Otsov. “Good-day,
      Ivan Kuzmitch.”
    

      “Ah . . . is that you?” asked Gryabov, not taking his eyes off
      the water. “Have you come?”
    

      “As you see . . . . And you are still taken up with your crazy
      nonsense! Not given it up yet?”
    

      “The devil’s in it. . . . I begin in the morning and fish all
      day . . . . The fishing is not up to much to-day. I’ve caught
      nothing and this dummy hasn’t either. We sit on and on and not a
      devil of a fish! I could scream!”
    

      “Well, chuck it up then. Let’s go and have some vodka!”
    

      “Wait a little, maybe we shall catch something. Towards evening the
      fish bite better . . . . I’ve been sitting here, my boy, ever since
      the morning! I can’t tell you how fearfully boring it is. It was the
      devil drove me to take to this fishing! I know that it is rotten idiocy
      for me to sit here. I sit here like some scoundrel, like a convict, and I
      stare at the water like a fool. I ought to go to the haymaking, but here I
      sit catching fish. Yesterday His Holiness held a service at Haponyevo, but
      I didn’t go. I spent the day here with this . . . with this
      she-devil.”
    

      “But . . . have you taken leave of your senses?” asked Otsov,
      glancing in embarrassment at the Englishwoman. “Using such language
      before a lady and she . . . .”
    

      “Oh, confound her, it doesn’t matter, she doesn’t
      understand a syllable of Russian, whether you praise her or blame her, it
      is all the same to her! Just look at her nose! Her nose alone is enough to
      make one faint. We sit here for whole days together and not a single word!
      She stands like a stuffed image and rolls the whites of her eyes at the
      water.”
    

      The Englishwoman gave a yawn, put a new worm on, and dropped the hook into
      the water.
    

      “I wonder at her not a little,” Gryabov went on, “the
      great stupid has been living in Russia for ten years and not a word of
      Russian! . . . Any little aristocrat among us goes to them and learns to
      babble away in their lingo, while they . . . there’s no making them
      out. Just look at her nose, do look at her nose!”
    

      “Come, drop it . . . it’s uncomfortable. Why attack a woman?”
    

      “She’s not a woman, but a maiden lady. . . . I bet she’s
      dreaming of suitors. The ugly doll. And she smells of something decaying .
      . . . I’ve got a loathing for her, my boy! I can’t look at her
      with indifference. When she turns her ugly eyes on me it sends a twinge
      all through me as though I had knocked my elbow on the parapet. She likes
      fishing too. Watch her: she fishes as though it were a holy rite! She
      looks upon everything with disdain . . . . She stands there, the wretch,
      and is conscious that she is a human being, and that therefore she is the
      monarch of nature. And do you know what her name is? Wilka Charlesovna
      Fyce! Tfoo! There is no getting it out!”
    

      The Englishwoman, hearing her name, deliberately turned her nose in
      Gryabov’s direction and scanned him with a disdainful glance; she
      raised her eyes from Gryabov to Otsov and steeped him in disdain. And all
      this in silence, with dignity and deliberation.
    

      “Did you see?” said Gryabov chuckling. “As though to say
      ‘take that.’ Ah, you monster! It’s only for the children’s
      sake that I keep that triton. If it weren’t for the children, I
      wouldn’t let her come within ten miles of my estate. . . . She has
      got a nose like a hawk’s . . . and her figure! That doll makes me
      think of a long nail, so I could take her, and knock her into the ground,
      you know. Stay, I believe I have got a bite. . . .”
    

      Gryabov jumped up and raised his rod. The line drew taut. . . . Gryabov
      tugged again, but could not pull out the hook.
    

      “It has caught,” he said, frowning, “on a stone I expect
      . . . damnation take it . . . .”
    

      There was a look of distress on Gryabov’s face. Sighing, moving
      uneasily, and muttering oaths, he began tugging at the line.
    

      “What a pity; I shall have to go into the water.”
    

      “Oh, chuck it!”
    

      “I can’t. . . . There’s always good fishing in the
      evening. . . . What a nuisance. Lord, forgive us, I shall have to wade
      into the water, I must! And if only you knew, I have no inclination to
      undress. I shall have to get rid of the Englishwoman. . . . It’s
      awkward to undress before her. After all, she is a lady, you know!”
    

      Gryabov flung off his hat, and his cravat.
    

      “Meess . . . er, er . . .” he said, addressing the
      Englishwoman, “Meess Fyce, je voo pree . . . ? Well, what am I to
      say to her? How am I to tell you so that you can understand? I say . . .
      over there! Go away over there! Do you hear?”
    

      Miss Fyce enveloped Gryabov in disdain, and uttered a nasal sound.
    

      “What? Don’t you understand? Go away from here, I tell you! I
      must undress, you devil’s doll! Go over there! Over there!”
    

      Gryabov pulled the lady by her sleeve, pointed her towards the bushes, and
      made as though he would sit down, as much as to say: Go behind the bushes
      and hide yourself there. . . . The Englishwoman, moving her eyebrows
      vigorously, uttered rapidly a long sentence in English. The gentlemen
      gushed with laughter.
    

      “It’s the first time in my life I’ve heard her voice.
      There’s no denying, it is a voice! She does not understand! Well,
      what am I to do with her?”
    

      “Chuck it, let’s go and have a drink of vodka!”
    

      “I can’t. Now’s the time to fish, the evening. . . . It’s
      evening . . . . Come, what would you have me do? It is a nuisance! I shall
      have to undress before her. . . .”
    

      Gryabov flung off his coat and his waistcoat and sat on the sand to take
      off his boots.
    

      “I say, Ivan Kuzmitch,” said the marshal, chuckling behind his
      hand. “It’s really outrageous, an insult.”
    

      “Nobody asks her not to understand! It’s a lesson for these
      foreigners!”
    

      Gryabov took off his boots and his trousers, flung off his undergarments
      and remained in the costume of Adam. Otsov held his sides, he turned
      crimson both from laughter and embarrassment. The Englishwoman twitched
      her brows and bKlinked . . . . A haughty, disdainful smile passed over her
      yellow face.
    

      “I must cool off,” said Gryabov, slapping himself on the ribs.
      “Tell me if you please, Fyodor Andreitch, why I have a rash on my
      chest every summer.”
    

      “Oh, do get into the water quickly or cover yourself with something,
      you beast.”
    

      “And if only she were confused, the nasty thing,” said
      Gryabov, crossing himself as he waded into the water. “Brrrr . . .
      the water’s cold. . . . Look how she moves her eyebrows! She doesn’t
      go away . . . she is far above the crowd! He, he, he . . . . and she doesn’t
      reckon us as human beings.”
    

      Wading knee deep in the water and drawing his huge figure up to its full
      height, he gave a wink and said:
    

      “This isn’t England, you see!”
    

      Miss Fyce coolly put on another worm, gave a yawn, and dropped the hook
      in. Otsov turned away, Gryabov released his hook, ducked into the water
      and, spluttering, waded out. Two minutes later he was sitting on the sand
      and angling as before.
    











      CHORISTERS
    

THE Justice of the
      Peace, who had received a letter from Petersburg, had set the news going
      that the owner of Yefremovo, Count Vladimir Ivanovitch, would soon be
      arriving. When he would arrive—there was no saying.
    

      “Like a thief in the night,” said Father Kuzma, a grey-headed
      little priest in a lilac cassock. “And when he does come the place
      will be crowded with the nobility and other high gentry. All the
      neighbours will flock here. Mind now, do your best, Alexey Alexeitch. . .
      . I beg you most earnestly.”
    

      “You need not trouble about me,” said Alexey Alexeitch,
      frowning. “I know my business. If only my enemy intones the litany
      in the right key. He may . . . out of sheer spite. . . .”
    

      “There, there. . . . I’ll persuade the deacon. . . I’ll
      persuade him.”
    

      Alexey Alexeitch was the sacristan of the Yefremovo church. He also taught
      the schoolboys church and secular singing, for which he received sixty
      roubles a year from the revenues of the Count’s estate. The
      schoolboys were bound to sing in church in return for their teaching.
      Alexey Alexeitch was a tall, thick-set man of dignified deportment, with a
      fat, clean-shaven face that reminded one of a cow’s udder. His
      imposing figure and double chin made him look like a man occupying an
      important position in the secular hierarchy rather than a sacristan. It
      was strange to see him, so dignified and imposing, flop to the ground
      before the bishop and, on one occasion, after too loud a squabble with the
      deacon Yevlampy Avdiessov, remain on his knees for two hours by order of
      the head priest of the district. Grandeur was more in keeping with his
      figure than humiliation.
    

      On account of the rumours of the Count’s approaching visit he had a
      choir practice every day, morning and evening. The choir practice was held
      at the school. It did not interfere much with the school work. During the
      practice the schoolmaster, Sergey Makaritch, set the children writing
      copies while he joined the tenors as an amateur.
    

      This is how the choir practice was conducted. Alexey Alexeitch would come
      into the school-room, slamming the door and blowing his nose. The trebles
      and altos extricated themselves noisily from the school-tables. The tenors
      and basses, who had been waiting for some time in the yard, came in,
      tramping like horses. They all took their places. Alexey Alexeitch drew
      himself up, made a sign to enforce silence, and struck a note with the
      tuning fork.
    

      “To-to-li-to-tom . . . Do-mi-sol-do!”
    

      “Adagio, adagio. . . . Once more.”
    

      After the “Amen” there followed “Lord have mercy upon us”
      from the Great Litany. All this had been learned long ago, sung a thousand
      times and thoroughly digested, and it was gone through simply as a
      formality. It was sung indolently, unconsciously. Alexey Alexeitch waved
      his arms calmly and chimed in now in a tenor, now in a bass voice. It was
      all slow, there was nothing interesting. . . . But before the “Cherubim”
      hymn the whole choir suddenly began blowing their noses, coughing and
      zealously turning the pages of their music. The sacristan turned his back
      on the choir and with a mysterious expression on his face began tuning his
      violin. The preparations lasted a couple of minutes.
    

      “Take your places. Look at your music carefully. . . . Basses, don’t
      overdo it . . . rather softly.”
    

      Bortnyansky’s “Cherubim” hymn, No. 7, was selected. At a
      given signal silence prevailed. All eyes were fastened on the music, the
      trebles opened their mouths. Alexey Alexeitch softly lowered his arm.
    

      “Piano . . . piano. . . . You see ‘piano’ is written
      there. . . . More lightly, more lightly.”
    

      When they had to sing “piano” an expression of benevolence and
      amiability overspread Alexey Alexeitch’s face, as though he was
      dreaming of a dainty morsel.
    

      “Forte . . . forte! Hold it!”
    

      And when they had to sing “forte” the sacristan’s fat
      face expressed alarm and even horror.
    

      The “Cherubim” hymn was sung well, so well that the
      school-children abandoned their copies and fell to watching the movements
      of Alexey Alexeitch. People stood under the windows. The school-watchman,
      Vassily, came in wearing an apron and carrying a dinner-knife in his hand
      and stood listening. Father Kuzma, with an anxious face appeared suddenly
      as though he had sprung from out of the earth. . . . After ‘Let us
      lay aside all earthly cares’ Alexey Alexeitch wiped the sweat off
      his brow and went up to Father Kuzma in excitement.
    

      “It puzzles me, Father Kuzma,” he said, shrugging his
      shoulders, “why is it that the Russian people have no understanding?
      It puzzles me, may the Lord chastise me! Such an uncultured people that
      you really cannot tell whether they have a windpipe in their throats or
      some other sort of internal arrangement. Were you choking, or what?”
      he asked, addressing the bass Gennady Semitchov, the innkeeper’s
      brother.
    

      “Why?”
    

      “What is your voice like? It rattles like a saucepan. I bet you were
      boozing yesterday! That’s what it is! Your breath smells like a
      tavern. . . . E-ech! You are a clodhopper, brother! You are a lout! How
      can you be a chorister if you keep company with peasants in the tavern?
      Ech, you are an ass, brother!”
    

      “It’s a sin, it’s a sin, brother,” muttered Father
      Kuzma. “God sees everything . . . through and through . . . .”
    

      “That’s why you have no idea of singing—because you care
      more for vodka than for godliness, you fool.”
    

      “Don’t work yourself up,” said Father Kuzma. “Don’t
      be cross. . . . I will persuade him.”
    

      Father Kuzma went up to Gennady Semitchov and began “persuading”
      him: “What do you do it for? Try and put your mind to it. A man who
      sings ought to restrain himself, because his throat is . . . er . .
      tender.”
    

      Gennady scratched his neck and looked sideways towards the window as
      though the words did not apply to him.
    

      After the “Cherubim” hymn they sang the Creed, then “It
      is meet and right”; they sang smoothly and with feeling, and so
      right on to “Our Father.”
    

      “To my mind, Father Kuzma,” said the sacristan, “the old
      ‘Our Father’ is better than the modern. That’s what we
      ought to sing before the Count.”
    

      “No, no. . . . Sing the modern one. For the Count hears nothing but
      modern music when he goes to Mass in Petersburg or Moscow. . . . In the
      churches there, I imagine . . . there’s very different sort of music
      there, brother!”
    

      After “Our Father” there was again a great blowing of noses,
      coughing and turning over of pages. The most difficult part of the
      performance came next: the “concert.” Alexey Alexeitch was
      practising two pieces, “Who is the God of glory” and “Universal
      Praise.” Whichever the choir learned best would be sung before the
      Count. During the “concert” the sacristan rose to a pitch of
      enthusiasm. The expression of benevolence was continually alternating with
      one of alarm.
    

      “Forte!” he muttered. “Andante! let yourselves go! Sing,
      you image! Tenors, you don’t bring it off! To-to-ti-to-tom. . . .
      Sol . . . si . . . sol, I tell you, you blockhead! Glory! Basses, glo . .
      . o . . . ry.”
    

      His bow travelled over the heads and shoulders of the erring trebles and
      altos. His left hand was continually pulling the ears of the young
      singers. On one occasion, carried away by his feelings he flipped the bass
      Gennady under the chin with his bent thumb. But the choristers were not
      moved to tears or to anger at his blows: they realised the full gravity of
      their task.
    

      After the “concert” came a minute of silence. Alexey
      Alexeitch, red, perspiring and exhausted, sat down on the window-sill, and
      turned upon the company lustreless, wearied, but triumphant eyes. In the
      listening crowd he observed to his immense annoyance the deacon Avdiessov.
      The deacon, a tall thick-set man with a red pock-marked face, and straw in
      his hair, stood leaning against the stove and grinning contemptuously.
    

      “That’s right, sing away! Perform your music!” he
      muttered in a deep bass. “Much the Count will care for your singing!
      He doesn’t care whether you sing with music or without. . . . For he
      is an atheist.”
    

      Father Kuzma looked round in a scared way and twiddled his fingers.
    

      “Come, come,” he muttered. “Hush, deacon, I beg.”
    

      After the “concert” they sang “May our lips be filled
      with praise,” and the choir practice was over. The choir broke up to
      reassemble in the evening for another practice. And so it went on every
      day.
    

      One month passed and then a second. . . . The steward, too, had by then
      received a notice that the Count would soon be coming. At last the dusty
      sun-blinds were taken off the windows of the big house, and Yefremovo
      heard the strains of the broken-down, out-of-tune piano. Father Kuzma was
      pining, though he could not himself have said why, or whether it was from
      delight or alarm. . . . The deacon went about grinning.
    

      The following Saturday evening Father Kuzma went to the sacristan’s
      lodgings. His face was pale, his shoulders drooped, the lilac of his
      cassock looked faded.
    

      “I have just been at his Excellency’s,” he said to the
      sacristan, stammering. “He is a cultivated gentleman with refined
      ideas. But . . . er . . . it’s mortifying, brother. . . . ‘At
      what o’clock, your Excellency, do you desire us to ring for Mass
      to-morrow?’ And he said: ‘As you think best. Only, couldn’t
      it be as short and quick as possible without a choir.’ Without a
      choir! Er . . . do you understand, without, without a choir. . . .”
    

      Alexey Alexeitch turned crimson. He would rather have spent two hours on
      his knees again than have heard those words! He did not sleep all night.
      He was not so much mortified at the waste of his labours as at the fact
      that the deacon would give him no peace now with his jeers. The deacon was
      delighted at his discomfiture. Next day all through the service he was
      casting disdainful glances towards the choir where Alexey Alexeitch was
      booming responses in solitude. When he passed by the choir with the censer
      he muttered:
    

      “Perform your music! Do your utmost! The Count will give a
      ten-rouble note to the choir!”
    

      After the service the sacristan went home, crushed and ill with
      mortification. At the gate he was overtaken by the red-faced deacon.
    

      “Stop a minute, Alyosha!” said the deacon. “Stop a
      minute, silly, don’t be cross! You are not the only one, I am in for
      it too! Immediately after the Mass Father Kuzma went up to the Count and
      asked: ‘And what did you think of the deacon’s voice, your
      Excellency. He has a deep bass, hasn’t he?’ And the Count—do
      you know what he answered by way of compliment? ‘Anyone can bawl,’
      he said. ‘A man’s voice is not as important as his brains.’
      A learned gentleman from Petersburg! An atheist is an atheist, and that’s
      all about it! Come, brother in misfortune, let us go and have a drop to
      drown our troubles!”
    

      And the enemies went out of the gate arm-in-arm.
    











      NERVES
    

DMITRI OSIPOVITCH
      VAXIN, the architect, returned from town to his holiday cottage greatly
      impressed by the spiritualistic sÃ©ance at which he had been present. As he
      undressed and got into his solitary bed (Madame Vaxin had gone to an
      all-night service) he could not help remembering all he had seen and
      heard. It had not, properly speaking, been a sÃ©ance at all, but the whole
      evening had been spent in terrifying conversation. A young lady had begun
      it by talking, apropos of nothing, about thought-reading. From
      thought-reading they had passed imperceptibly to spirits, and from spirits
      to ghosts, from ghosts to people buried alive. . . . A gentleman had read
      a horrible story of a corpse turning round in the coffin. Vaxin himself
      had asked for a saucer and shown the young ladies how to converse with
      spirits. He had called up among others the spirit of his deceased uncle,
      Klavdy Mironitch, and had mentally asked him:
    

      “Has not the time come for me to transfer the ownership of our house
      to my wife?”
    

      To which his uncle’s spirit had replied:
    

      “All things are good in their season.”
    

      “There is a great deal in nature that is mysterious and . . .
      terrible . . .” thought Vaxin, as he got into bed. “It’s
      not the dead but the unknown that’s so horrible.”
    

      It struck one o’clock. Vaxin turned over on the other side and
      peeped out from beneath the bedclothes at the blue light of the lamp
      burning before the holy ikon. The flame flickered and cast a faint light
      on the ikon-stand and the big portrait of Uncle Klavdy that hung facing
      his bed.
    

      “And what if the ghost of Uncle Klavdy should appear this minute?”
      flashed through Vaxin’s mind. “But, of course, that’s
      impossible.”
    

      Ghosts are, we all know, a superstition, the offspring of undeveloped
      intelligence, but Vaxin, nevertheless, pulled the bed-clothes over his
      head, and shut his eyes very tight. The corpse that turned round in its
      coffin came back to his mind, and the figures of his deceased
      mother-in-law, of a colleague who had hanged himself, and of a girl who
      had drowned herself, rose before his imagination. . . . Vaxin began trying
      to dispel these gloomy ideas, but the more he tried to drive them away the
      more haunting the figures and fearful fancies became. He began to feel
      frightened.
    

      “Hang it all!” he thought. “Here I am afraid in the dark
      like a child! Idiotic!”
    

      Tick . . . tick . . . tick . . . he heard the clock in the next room. The
      church-bell chimed the hour in the churchyard close by. The bell tolled
      slowly, depressingly, mournfully. . . . A cold chill ran down Vaxin’s
      neck and spine. He fancied he heard someone breathing heavily over his
      head, as though Uncle Klavdy had stepped out of his frame and was bending
      over his nephew. . . . Vaxin felt unbearably frightened. He clenched his
      teeth and held his breath in terror.
    

      At last, when a cockchafer flew in at the open window and began buzzing
      over his bed, he could bear it no longer and gave a violent tug at the
      bellrope.
    

      “Dmitri Osipitch, was wollen Sie?” he heard the voice
      of the German governess at his door a moment later.
    

      “Ah, it’s you, Rosalia Karlovna!” Vaxin cried,
      delighted. “Why do you trouble? Gavrila might just . . .”
    

      “Yourself Gavrila to the town sent. And Glafira is somewhere all the
      evening gone. . . . There’s nobody in the house. . . . Was wollen
      Sie doch?”
    

      “Well, what I wanted . . . it’s . . . but, please, come in . .
      . you needn’t mind! . . . it’s dark.”
    

      Rosalia Karlovna, a stout red-cheeked person, came in to the bedroom and
      stood in an expectant attitude at the door.
    

      “Sit down, please . . . you see, it’s like this. . . . What on
      earth am I to ask her for?” he wondered, stealing a glance at Uncle
      Klavdy’s portrait and feeling his soul gradually returning to
      tranquility.
    

      “What I really wanted to ask you was . . . Oh, when the man goes to
      town, don’t forget to tell him to . . . er . . . er . . . to get
      some cigarette-papers. . . . But do, please sit down.”
    

      “Cigarette-papers? good. . . . Was wollen Sie noch?”
    

      “Ich will . . . there’s nothing I will, but. . . But do
      sit down! I shall think of something else in a minute.”
    

      “It is shocking for a maiden in a man’s room to remain. . . .
      Mr. Vaxin, you are, I see, a naughty man. . . . I understand. . . . To
      order cigarette-papers one does not a person wake. . . . I understand you.
      . . .”
    

      Rosalia Karlovna turned and went out of the room.
    

      Somewhat reassured by his conversation with her and ashamed of his
      cowardice, Vaxin pulled the bedclothes over his head and shut his eyes.
      For about ten minutes he felt fairly comfortable, then the same nonsense
      came creeping back into his mind. . . . He swore to himself, felt for the
      matches, and without opening his eyes lighted a candle.
    

      But even the light was no use. To Vaxin’ s excited imagination it
      seemed as though someone were peeping round the corner and that his uncle’s
      eyes were moving.
    

      “I’ll ring her up again . . . damn the woman!” he
      decided. “I’ll tell her I’m unwell and ask for some
      drops.”
    

      Vaxin rang. There was no response. He rang again, and as though answering
      his ring, he heard the church-bell toll the hour.
    

      Overcome with terror, cold all over, he jumped out of bed, ran headlong
      out of his bedroom, and making the sign of the cross and cursing himself
      for his cowardice, he fled barefoot in his night-shirt to the governess’s
      room.
    

      “Rosalia Karlovna!” he began in a shaking voice as he knocked
      at her door, “Rosalia Karlovna! . . . Are you asleep? . . . I feel .
      . . so . . . er . . . er . . . unwell. . . . Drops! . . .”
    

      There was no answer. Silence reigned.
    

      “I beg you . . . do you understand? I beg you! Why this
      squeamishness, I can’t understand . . . especially when a man . . .
      is ill . . . How absurdly zierlich manierlich you are really . . .
      at your age. . . .”
    

      “I to your wife shall tell. . . . Will not leave an honest maiden in
      peace. . . . When I was at Baron Anzig’s, and the baron try to come
      to me for matches, I understand at once what his matches mean and tell to
      the baroness. . . . I am an honest maiden.”
    

      “Hang your honesty! I am ill I tell you . . . and asking you for
      drops. Do you understand? I’m ill!”
    

      “Your wife is an honest, good woman, and you ought her to love! Ja!
      She is noble! . . . I will not be her foe!”
    

      “You are a fool! simply a fool! Do you understand, a fool?”
    

      Vaxin leaned against the door-post, folded his arms and waited for his
      panic to pass off. To return to his room where the lamp flickered and his
      uncle stared at him from his frame was more than he could face, and to
      stand at the governess’s door in nothing but his night-shirt was
      inconvenient from every point of view. What could he do?
    

      It struck two o’clock and his terror had not left him. There was no
      light in the passage and something dark seemed to be peeping out from
      every corner. Vaxin turned so as to face the door-post, but at that
      instant it seemed as though somebody tweaked his night-shirt from behind
      and touched him on the shoulder.
    

      “Damnation! . . . Rosalia Karlovna!”
    

      No answer. Vaxin hesitatingly opened the door and peeped into the room.
      The virtuous German was sweetly slumbering. The tiny flame of a
      night-light threw her solid buxom person into relief. Vaxin stepped into
      the room and sat down on a wickerwork trunk near the door. He felt better
      in the presence of a living creature, even though that creature was
      asleep.
    

      “Let the German idiot sleep,” he thought, “I’ll
      sit here, and when it gets light I’ll go back. . . . It’s
      daylight early now.”
    

      Vaxin curled up on the trunk and put his arm under his head to await the
      coming of dawn.
    

      “What a thing it is to have nerves!” he reflected. “An
      educated, intelligent man! . . . Hang it all! . . . It’s a perfect
      disgrace!”
    

      As he listened to the gentle, even breathing of Rosalia Karlovna, he soon
      recovered himself completely.
    

      At six o’clock, Vaxin’s wife returned from the all-night
      service, and not finding her husband in their bedroom, went to the
      governess to ask her for some change for the cabman.
    

      On entering the German’s room, a strange sight met her eyes.
    

      On the bed lay stretched Rosalia Karlovna fast asleep, and a couple of
      yards from her was her husband curled up on the trunk sleeping the sleep
      of the just and snoring loudly.
    

      What she said to her husband, and how he looked when he woke, I leave to
      others to describe. It is beyond my powers.
    











      A WORK OF ART
    

SASHA SMIRNOV, the
      only son of his mother, holding under his arm, something wrapped up in No.
      223 of the Financial News, assumed a sentimental expression, and
      went into Dr. Koshelkov’s consulting-room.
    

      “Ah, dear lad!” was how the doctor greeted him. “Well!
      how are we feeling? What good news have you for me?”
    

      Sasha bKlinked, laid his hand on his heart and said in an agitated voice:
      “Mamma sends her greetings to you, Ivan Nikolaevitch, and told me to
      thank you. . . . I am the only son of my mother and you have saved my life
      . . . you have brought me through a dangerous illness and . . . we do not
      know how to thank you.”
    

      “Nonsense, lad!” said the doctor, highly delighted. “I
      only did what anyone else would have done in my place.”
    

      “I am the only son of my mother . . . we are poor people and cannot
      of course repay you, and we are quite ashamed, doctor, although, however,
      mamma and I . . . the only son of my mother, earnestly beg you to accept
      in token of our gratitude . . . this object, which . . . An object of
      great value, an antique bronze. . . . A rare work of art.”
    

      “You shouldn’t!” said the doctor, frowning. “What’s
      this for!”
    

      “No, please do not refuse,” Sasha went on muttering as he
      unpacked the parcel. “You will wound mamma and me by refusing. . . .
      It’s a fine thing . . . an antique bronze. . . . It was left us by
      my deceased father and we have kept it as a precious souvenir. My father
      used to buy antique bronzes and sell them to connoisseurs . . . Mamma and
      I keep on the business now.”
    

      Sasha undid the object and put it solemnly on the table. It was a not very
      tall candelabra of old bronze and artistic workmanship. It consisted of a
      group: on the pedestal stood two female figures in the costume of Eve and
      in attitudes for the description of which I have neither the courage nor
      the fitting temperament. The figures were smiling coquettishly and
      altogether looked as though, had it not been for the necessity of
      supporting the candlestick, they would have skipped off the pedestal and
      have indulged in an orgy such as is improper for the reader even to
      imagine.
    

      Looking at the present, the doctor slowly scratched behind his ear,
      cleared his throat and blew his nose irresolutely.
    

      “Yes, it certainly is a fine thing,” he muttered, “but .
      . . how shall I express it? . . . it’s . . . h’m . . . it’s
      not quite for family reading. It’s not simply decolletÃ© but beyond
      anything, dash it all. . . .”
    

      “How do you mean?”
    

      “The serpent-tempter himself could not have invented anything worse
      . . . . Why, to put such a phantasmagoria on the table would be defiling
      the whole flat.”
    

      “What a strange way of looking at art, doctor!” said Sasha,
      offended. “Why, it is an artistic thing, look at it! There is so
      much beauty and elegance that it fills one’s soul with a feeling of
      reverence and brings a lump into one’s throat! When one sees
      anything so beautiful one forgets everything earthly. . . . Only look, how
      much movement, what an atmosphere, what expression!”
    

      “I understand all that very well, my dear boy,” the doctor
      interposed, “but you know I am a family man, my children run in
      here, ladies come in.”
    

      “Of course if you look at it from the point of view of the crowd,”
      said Sasha, “then this exquisitely artistic work may appear in a
      certain light. . . . But, doctor, rise superior to the crowd, especially
      as you will wound mamma and me by refusing it. I am the only son of my
      mother, you have saved my life. . . . We are giving you the thing most
      precious to us and . . . and I only regret that I have not the pair to
      present to you. . . .”
    

      “Thank you, my dear fellow, I am very grateful . . . Give my
      respects to your mother but really consider, my children run in here,
      ladies come. . . . However, let it remain! I see there’s no arguing
      with you.”
    

      “And there is nothing to argue about,” said Sasha, relieved.
      “Put the candlestick here, by this vase. What a pity we have not the
      pair to it! It is a pity! Well, good-bye, doctor.”
    

      After Sasha’s departure the doctor looked for a long time at the
      candelabra, scratched behind his ear and meditated.
    

      “It’s a superb thing, there’s no denying it,” he
      thought, “and it would be a pity to throw it away. . . . But it’s
      impossible for me to keep it. . . . H’m! . . . Here’s a
      problem! To whom can I make a present of it, or to what charity can I give
      it?”
    

      After long meditation he thought of his good friend, the lawyer Uhov, to
      whom he was indebted for the management of legal business.
    

      “Excellent,” the doctor decided, “it would be awkward
      for him as a friend to take money from me, and it will be very suitable
      for me to present him with this. I will take him the devilish thing!
      Luckily he is a bachelor and easy-going.”
    

      Without further procrastination the doctor put on his hat and coat, took
      the candelabra and went off to Uhov’s.
    

      “How are you, friend!” he said, finding the lawyer at home.
      “I’ve come to see you . . . to thank you for your efforts. . .
      . You won’t take money so you must at least accept this thing here.
      . . . See, my dear fellow. . . . The thing is magnificent!”
    

      On seeing the bronze the lawyer was moved to indescribable delight.
    

      “What a specimen!” he chuckled. “Ah, deuce take it, to
      think of them imagining such a thing, the devils! Exquisite! Ravishing!
      Where did you get hold of such a delightful thing?”
    

      After pouring out his ecstasies the lawyer looked timidly towards the door
      and said: “Only you must carry off your present, my boy . . . . I
      can’t take it. . . .”
    

      “Why?” cried the doctor, disconcerted.
    

      “Why . . . because my mother is here at times, my clients . . .
      besides I should be ashamed for my servants to see it.”
    

      “Nonsense! Nonsense! Don’t you dare to refuse!” said the
      doctor, gesticulating. “It’s piggish of you! It’s a work
      of art! . . . What movement . . . what expression! I won’t even talk
      of it! You will offend me!”
    

      “If one could plaster it over or stick on fig-leaves . . .”
    

      But the doctor gesticulated more violently than before, and dashing out of
      the flat went home, glad that he had succeeded in getting the present off
      his hands.
    

      When he had gone away the lawyer examined the candelabra, fingered it all
      over, and then, like the doctor, racked his brains over the question what
      to do with the present.
    

      “It’s a fine thing,” he mused, “and it would be a
      pity to throw it away and improper to keep it. The very best thing would
      be to make a present of it to someone. . . . I know what! I’ll take
      it this evening to Shashkin, the comedian. The rascal is fond of such
      things, and by the way it is his benefit tonight.”
    

      No sooner said than done. In the evening the candelabra, carefully wrapped
      up, was duly carried to Shashkin’s. The whole evening the comic
      actor’s dressing-room was besieged by men coming to admire the
      present; the dressing-room was filled with the hum of enthusiasm and
      laughter like the neighing of horses. If one of the actresses approached
      the door and asked: “May I come in?” the comedian’s
      husky voice was heard at once: “No, no, my dear, I am not dressed!”
    

      After the performance the comedian shrugged his shoulders, flung up his
      hands and said: “Well what am I to do with the horrid thing? Why, I
      live in a private flat! Actresses come and see me! It’s not a
      photograph that you can put in a drawer!”
    

      “You had better sell it, sir,” the hairdresser who was
      disrobing the actor advised him. “There’s an old woman living
      about here who buys antique bronzes. Go and enquire for Madame Smirnov . .
      . everyone knows her.”
    

      The actor followed his advice. . . . Two days later the doctor was sitting
      in his consulting-room, and with his finger to his brow was meditating on
      the acids of the bile. All at once the door opened and Sasha Smirnov flew
      into the room. He was smiling, beaming, and his whole figure was radiant
      with happiness. In his hands he held something wrapped up in newspaper.
    

      “Doctor!” he began breathlessly, “imagine my delight!
      Happily for you we have succeeded in picking up the pair to your
      candelabra! Mamma is so happy. . . . I am the only son of my mother, you
      saved my life. . . .”
    

      And Sasha, all of a tremor with gratitude, set the candelabra before the
      doctor. The doctor opened his mouth, tried to say something, but said
      nothing: he could not speak.
    











      A JOKE
    

IT was a bright
      winter midday. . . . There was a sharp snapping frost and the curls on
      Nadenka’s temples and the down on her upper lip were covered with
      silvery frost. She was holding my arm and we were standing on a high hill.
      From where we stood to the ground below there stretched a smooth sloping
      descent in which the sun was reflected as in a looking-glass. Beside us
      was a little sledge lined with bright red cloth.
    

      “Let us go down, Nadyezhda Petrovna!” I besought her. “Only
      once! I assure you we shall be all right and not hurt.”
    

      But Nadenka was afraid. The slope from her little goloshes to the bottom
      of the ice hill seemed to her a terrible, immensely deep abyss. Her spirit
      failed her, and she held her breath as she looked down, when I merely
      suggested her getting into the sledge, but what would it be if she were to
      risk flying into the abyss! She would die, she would go out of her mind.
    

      “I entreat you!” I said. “You mustn’t be afraid!
      You know it’s poor-spirited, it’s cowardly!”
    

      Nadenka gave way at last, and from her face I saw that she gave way in
      mortal dread. I sat her in the sledge, pale and trembling, put my arm
      round her and with her cast myself down the precipice.
    

      The sledge flew like a bullet. The air cleft by our flight beat in our
      faces, roared, whistled in our ears, tore at us, nipped us cruelly in its
      anger, tried to tear our heads off our shoulders. We had hardly strength
      to breathe from the pressure of the wind. It seemed as though the devil
      himself had caught us in his claws and was dragging us with a roar to
      hell. Surrounding objects melted into one long furiously racing streak . .
      . another moment and it seemed we should perish.
    

      “I love you, Nadya!” I said in a low voice.
    

      The sledge began moving more and more slowly, the roar of the wind and the
      whirr of the runners was no longer so terrible, it was easier to breathe,
      and at last we were at the bottom. Nadenka was more dead than alive. She
      was pale and scarcely breathing. . . . I helped her to get up.
    

      “Nothing would induce me to go again,” she said, looking at me
      with wide eyes full of horror. “Nothing in the world! I almost died!”
    

      A little later she recovered herself and looked enquiringly into my eyes,
      wondering had I really uttered those four words or had she fancied them in
      the roar of the hurricane. And I stood beside her smoking and looking
      attentively at my glove.
    

      She took my arm and we spent a long while walking near the ice-hill. The
      riddle evidently would not let her rest. . . . Had those words been
      uttered or not? . . . Yes or no? Yes or no? It was the question of pride,
      or honour, of life—a very important question, the most important
      question in the world. Nadenka kept impatiently, sorrowfully looking into
      my face with a penetrating glance; she answered at random, waiting to see
      whether I would not speak. Oh, the play of feeling on that sweet face! I
      saw that she was struggling with herself, that she wanted to say
      something, to ask some question, but she could not find the words; she
      felt awkward and frightened and troubled by her joy. . . .
    

      “Do you know what,” she said without looking at me.
    

      “Well?” I asked.
    

      “Let us . . . slide down again.”
    

      We clambered up the ice-hill by the steps again. I sat Nadenka, pale and
      trembling, in the sledge; again we flew into the terrible abyss, again the
      wind roared and the runners whirred, and again when the flight of our
      sledge was at its swiftest and noisiest, I said in a low voice:
    

      “I love you, Nadenka!”
    

      When the sledge stopped, Nadenka flung a glance at the hill down which we
      had both slid, then bent a long look upon my face, listened to my voice
      which was unconcerned and passionless, and the whole of her little figure,
      every bit of it, even her muff and her hood expressed the utmost
      bewilderment, and on her face was written: “What does it mean? Who
      uttered those words? Did he, or did I only fancy it?”
    

      The uncertainty worried her and drove her out of all patience. The poor
      girl did not answer my questions, frowned, and was on the point of tears.
    

      “Hadn’t we better go home?” I asked.
    

      “Well, I . . . I like this tobogganning,” she said, flushing.
      “Shall we go down once more?”
    

      She “liked” the tobogganning, and yet as she got into the
      sledge she was, as both times before, pale, trembling, hardly able to
      breathe for terror.
    

      We went down for the third time, and I saw she was looking at my face and
      watching my lips. But I put my handkerchief to my lips, coughed, and when
      we reached the middle of the hill I succeeded in bringing out:
    

      “I love you, Nadya!”
    

      And the mystery remained a mystery! Nadenka was silent, pondering on
      something. . . . I saw her home, she tried to walk slowly, slackened her
      pace and kept waiting to see whether I would not say those words to her,
      and I saw how her soul was suffering, what effort she was making not to
      say to herself:
    

      “It cannot be that the wind said them! And I don’t want it to
      be the wind that said them!”
    

      Next morning I got a little note:
    

      “If you are tobogganning to-day, come for me.—N.”
    

      And from that time I began going every day tobogganning with Nadenka, and
      as we flew down in the sledge, every time I pronounced in a low voice the
      same words: “I love you, Nadya!”
    

      Soon Nadenka grew used to that phrase as to alcohol or morphia. She could
      not live without it. It is true that flying down the ice-hill terrified
      her as before, but now the terror and danger gave a peculiar fascination
      to words of love—words which as before were a mystery and tantalized
      the soul. The same two—the wind and I were still suspected. . . .
      Which of the two was making love to her she did not know, but apparently
      by now she did not care; from which goblet one drinks matters little if
      only the beverage is intoxicating.
    

      It happened I went to the skating-ground alone at midday; mingling with
      the crowd I saw Nadenka go up to the ice-hill and look about for me . . .
      then she timidly mounted the steps. . . . She was frightened of going
      alone—oh, how frightened! She was white as the snow, she was
      trembling, she went as though to the scaffold, but she went, she went
      without looking back, resolutely. She had evidently determined to put it
      to the test at last: would those sweet amazing words be heard when I was
      not there? I saw her, pale, her lips parted with horror, get into the
      sledge, shut her eyes and saying good-bye for ever to the earth, set off.
      . . . “Whrrr!” whirred the runners. Whether Nadenka heard
      those words I do not know. I only saw her getting up from the sledge
      looking faint and exhausted. And one could tell from her face that she
      could not tell herself whether she had heard anything or not. Her terror
      while she had been flying down had deprived of her all power of hearing,
      of discriminating sounds, of understanding.
    

      But then the month of March arrived . . . the spring sunshine was more
      kindly. . . . Our ice-hill turned dark, lost its brilliance and finally
      melted. We gave up tobogganning. There was nowhere now where poor Nadenka
      could hear those words, and indeed no one to utter them, since there was
      no wind and I was going to Petersburg—for long, perhaps for ever.
    

      It happened two days before my departure I was sitting in the dusk in the
      little garden which was separated from the yard of Nadenka’s house
      by a high fence with nails in it. . . . It was still pretty cold, there
      was still snow by the manure heap, the trees looked dead but there was
      already the scent of spring and the rooks were cawing loudly as they
      settled for their night’s rest. I went up to the fence and stood for
      a long while peeping through a chink. I saw Nadenka come out into the
      porch and fix a mournful yearning gaze on the sky. . . . The spring wind
      was blowing straight into her pale dejected face. . . . It reminded her of
      the wind which roared at us on the ice-hill when she heard those four
      words, and her face became very, very sorrowful, a tear trickled down her
      cheek, and the poor child held out both arms as though begging the wind to
      bring her those words once more. And waiting for the wind I said in a low
      voice:
    

      “I love you, Nadya!”
    

      Mercy! The change that came over Nadenka! She uttered a cry, smiled all
      over her face and looking joyful, happy and beautiful, held out her arms
      to meet the wind.
    

      And I went off to pack up. . . .
    

      That was long ago. Now Nadenka is married; she married—whether of
      her own choice or not does not matter—a secretary of the Nobility
      Wardenship and now she has three children. That we once went tobogganning
      together, and that the wind brought her the words “I love you,
      Nadenka,” is not forgotten; it is for her now the happiest, most
      touching, and beautiful memory in her life. . . .
    

      But now that I am older I cannot understand why I uttered those words,
      what was my motive in that joke. . . .
    











      A COUNTRY COTTAGE
    

Two young people
      who had not long been married were walking up and down the platform of a
      little country station. His arm was round her waist, her head was almost
      on his shoulder, and both were happy.
    

      The moon peeped up from the drifting cloudlets and frowned, as it seemed,
      envying their happiness and regretting her tedious and utterly superfluous
      virginity. The still air was heavy with the fragrance of lilac and wild
      cherry. Somewhere in the distance beyond the line a corncrake was calling.
    

      “How beautiful it is, Sasha, how beautiful!” murmured the
      young wife. “It all seems like a dream. See, how sweet and inviting
      that little copse looks! How nice those solid, silent telegraph posts are!
      They add a special note to the landscape, suggesting humanity,
      civilization in the distance. . . . Don’t you think it’s
      lovely when the wind brings the rushing sound of a train?”
    

      “Yes. . . . But what hot little hands you’ve got. . . That’s
      because you’re excited, Varya. . . . What have you got for our
      supper to-night?”
    

      “Chicken and salad. . . . It’s a chicken just big enough for
      two . . . . Then there is the salmon and sardines that were sent from
      town.”
    

      The moon as though she had taken a pinch of snuff hid her face behind a
      cloud. Human happiness reminded her of her own loneliness, of her solitary
      couch beyond the hills and dales.
    

      “The train is coming!” said Varya, “how jolly!”
    

      Three eyes of fire could be seen in the distance. The stationmaster came
      out on the platform. Signal lights flashed here and there on the line.
    

      “Let’s see the train in and go home,” said Sasha,
      yawning. “What a splendid time we are having together, Varya, it’s
      so splendid, one can hardly believe it’s true!”
    

      The dark monster crept noiselessly alongside the platform and came to a
      standstill. They caught glimpses of sleepy faces, of hats and shoulders at
      the dimly lighted windows.
    

      “Look! look!” they heard from one of the carriages. “Varya
      and Sasha have come to meet us! There they are! . . . Varya! . . . Varya.
      . . . Look!”
    

      Two little girls skipped out of the train and hung on Varya’s neck.
      They were followed by a stout, middle-aged lady, and a tall, lanky
      gentleman with grey whiskers; behind them came two schoolboys, laden with
      bags, and after the schoolboys, the governess, after the governess the
      grandmother.
    

      “Here we are, here we are, dear boy!” began the whiskered
      gentleman, squeezing Sasha’s hand. “Sick of waiting for us, I
      expect! You have been pitching into your old uncle for not coming down all
      this time, I daresay! Kolya, Kostya, Nina, Fifa . . . children! Kiss your
      cousin Sasha! We’re all here, the whole troop of us, just for three
      or four days. . . . I hope we shan’t be too many for you? You mustn’t
      let us put you out!”
    

      At the sight of their uncle and his family, the young couple were
      horror-stricken. While his uncle talked and kissed them, Sasha had a
      vision of their little cottage: he and Varya giving up their three little
      rooms, all the pillows and bedding to their guests; the salmon, the
      sardines, the chicken all devoured in a single instant; the cousins
      plucking the flowers in their little garden, spilling the ink, filled the
      cottage with noise and confusion; his aunt talking continually about her
      ailments and her papa’s having been Baron von Fintich. . . .
    

      And Sasha looked almost with hatred at his young wife, and whispered:
    

      “It’s you they’ve come to see! . . . Damn them!”
    

      “No, it’s you,” answered Varya, pale with anger. “They’re
      your relations! they’re not mine!”
    

      And turning to her visitors, she said with a smile of welcome: “Welcome
      to the cottage!”
    

      The moon came out again. She seemed to smile, as though she were glad she
      had no relations. Sasha, turning his head away to hide his angry
      despairing face, struggled to give a note of cordial welcome to his voice
      as he said:
    

      “It is jolly of you! Welcome to the cottage!”
    











      A BLUNDER
    

ILYA SERGEITCH
      PEPLOV and his wife Kleopatra Petrovna were standing at the door,
      listening greedily. On the other side in the little drawing-room a love
      scene was apparently taking place between two persons: their daughter
      Natashenka and a teacher of the district school, called Shchupkin.
    

      “He’s rising!” whispered Peplov, quivering with
      impatience and rubbing his hands. “Now, Kleopatra, mind; as soon as
      they begin talking of their feelings, take down the ikon from the wall and
      we’ll go in and bless them. . . . We’ll catch him. . . . A
      blessing with an ikon is sacred and binding. . . He couldn’t get out
      of it, if he brought it into court.”
    

      On the other side of the door this was the conversation:
    

      “Don’t go on like that!” said Shchupkin, striking a
      match against his checked trousers. “I never wrote you any letters!”
    

      “I like that! As though I didn’t know your writing!”
      giggled the girl with an affected shriek, continually peeping at herself
      in the glass. “I knew it at once! And what a queer man you are! You
      are a writing master, and you write like a spider! How can you teach
      writing if you write so badly yourself?”
    

      “H’m! . . . That means nothing. The great thing in writing
      lessons is not the hand one writes, but keeping the boys in order. You hit
      one on the head with a ruler, make another kneel down. . . . Besides,
      there’s nothing in handwriting! Nekrassov was an author, but his
      handwriting’s a disgrace, there’s a specimen of it in his
      collected works.”
    

      “You are not Nekrassov. . . .” (A sigh). “I should love
      to marry an author. He’d always be writing poems to me.”
    

      “I can write you a poem, too, if you like.”
    

      “What can you write about?”
    

      “Love—passion—your eyes. You’ll be crazy when you
      read it. It would draw a tear from a stone! And if I write you a real
      poem, will you let me kiss your hand?”
    

      “That’s nothing much! You can kiss it now if you like.”
    

      Shchupkin jumped up, and making sheepish eyes, bent over the fat little
      hand that smelt of egg soap.
    

      “Take down the ikon,” Peplov whispered in a fluster, pale with
      excitement, and buttoning his coat as he prodded his wife with his elbow.
      “Come along, now!”
    

      And without a second’s delay Peplov flung open the door.
    

      “Children,” he muttered, lifting up his arms and bKlinking
      tearfully, “the Lord bless you, my children. May you live—be
      fruitful—and multiply.”
    

      “And—and I bless you, too,” the mamma brought out,
      crying with happiness. “May you be happy, my dear ones! Oh, you are
      taking from me my only treasure!” she said to Shchupkin. “Love
      my girl, be good to her. . . .”
    

      Shchupkin’s mouth fell open with amazement and alarm. The parents’
      attack was so bold and unexpected that he could not utter a single word.
    

      “I’m in for it! I’m spliced!” he thought, going
      limp with horror. “It’s all over with you now, my boy! There’s
      no escape!”
    

      And he bowed his head submissively, as though to say, “Take me, I’m
      vanquished.”
    

      “Ble-blessings on you,” the papa went on, and he, too, shed
      tears. “Natashenka, my daughter, stand by his side. Kleopatra, give
      me the ikon.”
    

      But at this point the father suddenly left off weeping, and his face was
      contorted with anger.
    

      “You ninny!” he said angrily to his wife. “You are an
      idiot! Is that the ikon?”
    

      “Ach, saints alive!”
    

      What had happened? The writing master raised himself and saw that he was
      saved; in her flutter the mamma had snatched from the wall the portrait of
      Lazhetchnikov, the author, in mistake for the ikon. Old Peplov and his
      wife stood disconcerted in the middle of the room, holding the portrait
      aloft, not knowing what to do or what to say. The writing master took
      advantage of the general confusion and slipped away.
    











      FAT AND THIN
    

Two friends—one
      a fat man and the other a thin man—met at the Nikolaevsky station.
      The fat man had just dined in the station and his greasy lips shone like
      ripe cherries. He smelt of sherry and fleur d’orange. The
      thin man had just slipped out of the train and was laden with
      portmanteaus, bundles, and bandboxes. He smelt of ham and coffee grounds.
      A thin woman with a long chin, his wife, and a tall schoolboy with one eye
      screwed up came into view behind his back.
    

      “Porfiry,” cried the fat man on seeing the thin man. “Is
      it you? My dear fellow! How many summers, how many winters!”
    

      “Holy saints!” cried the thin man in amazement. “Misha!
      The friend of my childhood! Where have you dropped from?”
    

      The friends kissed each other three times, and gazed at each other with
      eyes full of tears. Both were agreeably astounded.
    

      “My dear boy!” began the thin man after the kissing. “This
      is unexpected! This is a surprise! Come have a good look at me! Just as
      handsome as I used to be! Just as great a darling and a dandy! Good
      gracious me! Well, and how are you? Made your fortune? Married? I am
      married as you see. . . . This is my wife Luise, her maiden name was
      Vantsenbach . . . of the Lutheran persuasion. . . . And this is my son
      Nafanail, a schoolboy in the third class. This is the friend of my
      childhood, Nafanya. We were boys at school together!”
    

      Nafanail thought a little and took off his cap.
    

      “We were boys at school together,” the thin man went on.
      “Do you remember how they used to tease you? You were nicknamed
      Herostratus because you burned a hole in a schoolbook with a cigarette,
      and I was nicknamed Ephialtes because I was fond of telling tales. Ho—ho!
      . . . we were children! . . . Don’t be shy, Nafanya. Go nearer to
      him. And this is my wife, her maiden name was Vantsenbach, of the Lutheran
      persuasion. . . .”
    

      Nafanail thought a little and took refuge behind his father’s back.
    

      “Well, how are you doing my friend?” the fat man asked,
      looking enthusiastically at his friend. “Are you in the service?
      What grade have you reached?”
    

      “I am, dear boy! I have been a collegiate assessor for the last two
      years and I have the Stanislav. The salary is poor, but that’s no
      great matter! The wife gives music lessons, and I go in for carving wooden
      cigarette cases in a private way. Capital cigarette cases! I sell them for
      a rouble each. If any one takes ten or more I make a reduction of course.
      We get along somehow. I served as a clerk, you know, and now I have been
      transferred here as a head clerk in the same department. I am going to
      serve here. And what about you? I bet you are a civil councillor by now?
      Eh?”
    

      “No dear boy, go higher than that,” said the fat man. “I
      have risen to privy councillor already . . . I have two stars.”
    

      The thin man turned pale and rigid all at once, but soon his face twisted
      in all directions in the broadest smile; it seemed as though sparks were
      flashing from his face and eyes. He squirmed, he doubled together,
      crumpled up. . . . His portmanteaus, bundles and cardboard boxes seemed to
      shrink and crumple up too. . . . His wife’s long chin grew longer
      still; Nafanail drew himself up to attention and fastened all the buttons
      of his uniform.
    

      “Your Excellency, I . . . delighted! The friend, one may say, of
      childhood and to have turned into such a great man! He—he!”
    

      “Come, come!” the fat man frowned. “What’s this
      tone for? You and I were friends as boys, and there is no need of this
      official obsequiousness!”
    

      “Merciful heavens, your Excellency! What are you saying. . . ?”
      sniggered the thin man, wriggling more than ever. “Your Excellency’s
      gracious attention is like refreshing manna. . . . This, your Excellency,
      is my son Nafanail, . . . my wife Luise, a Lutheran in a certain sense.”
    

      The fat man was about to make some protest, but the face of the thin man
      wore an expression of such reverence, sugariness, and mawkish
      respectfulness that the privy councillor was sickened. He turned away from
      the thin man, giving him his hand at parting.
    

      The thin man pressed three fingers, bowed his whole body and sniggered
      like a Chinaman: “He—he—he!” His wife smiled.
      Nafanail scraped with his foot and dropped his cap. All three were
      agreeably overwhelmed.
    











      THE DEATH OF A GOVERNMENT CLERK
    

ONE fine evening, a
      no less fine government clerk called Ivan Dmitritch Tchervyakov was
      sitting in the second row of the stalls, gazing through an opera glass at
      the Cloches de Corneville. He gazed and felt at the acme of bliss.
      But suddenly. . . . In stories one so often meets with this “But
      suddenly.” The authors are right: life is so full of surprises! But
      suddenly his face puckered up, his eyes disappeared, his breathing was
      arrested . . . he took the opera glass from his eyes, bent over and . . .
      “Aptchee!!” he sneezed as you perceive. It is not
      reprehensible for anyone to sneeze anywhere. Peasants sneeze and so do
      police superintendents, and sometimes even privy councillors. All men
      sneeze. Tchervyakov was not in the least confused, he wiped his face with
      his handkerchief, and like a polite man, looked round to see whether he
      had disturbed any one by his sneezing. But then he was overcome with
      confusion. He saw that an old gentleman sitting in front of him in the
      first row of the stalls was carefully wiping his bald head and his neck
      with his glove and muttering something to himself. In the old gentleman,
      Tchervyakov recognised Brizzhalov, a civilian general serving in the
      Department of Transport.
    

      “I have spattered him,” thought Tchervyakov, “he is not
      the head of my department, but still it is awkward. I must apologise.”
    

      Tchervyakov gave a cough, bent his whole person forward, and whispered in
      the general’s ear.
    

      “Pardon, your Excellency, I spattered you accidentally. . . .”
    

      “Never mind, never mind.”
    

      “For goodness sake excuse me, I . . . I did not mean to.”
    

      “Oh, please, sit down! let me listen!”
    

      Tchervyakov was embarrassed, he smiled stupidly and fell to gazing at the
      stage. He gazed at it but was no longer feeling bliss. He began to be
      troubled by uneasiness. In the interval, he went up to Brizzhalov, walked
      beside him, and overcoming his shyness, muttered:
    

      “I spattered you, your Excellency, forgive me . . . you see . . . I
      didn’t do it to . . . .”
    

      “Oh, that’s enough . . . I’d forgotten it, and you keep
      on about it!” said the general, moving his lower lip impatiently.
    

      “He has forgotten, but there is a fiendish light in his eye,”
      thought Tchervyakov, looking suspiciously at the general. “And he
      doesn’t want to talk. I ought to explain to him . . . that I really
      didn’t intend . . . that it is the law of nature or else he will
      think I meant to spit on him. He doesn’t think so now, but he will
      think so later!”
    

      On getting home, Tchervyakov told his wife of his breach of good manners.
      It struck him that his wife took too frivolous a view of the incident; she
      was a little frightened, but when she learned that Brizzhalov was in a
      different department, she was reassured.
    

      “Still, you had better go and apologise,” she said, “or
      he will think you don’t know how to behave in public.”
    

      “That’s just it! I did apologise, but he took it somehow
      queerly . . . he didn’t say a word of sense. There wasn’t time
      to talk properly.”
    

      Next day Tchervyakov put on a new uniform, had his hair cut and went to
      Brizzhalov’s to explain; going into the general’s reception
      room he saw there a number of petitioners and among them the general
      himself, who was beginning to interview them. After questioning several
      petitioners the general raised his eyes and looked at Tchervyakov.
    

      “Yesterday at the Arcadia, if you recollect, your Excellency,”
      the latter began, “I sneezed and . . . accidentally spattered . . .
      Exc. . . .”
    

      “What nonsense. . . . It’s beyond anything! What can I do for
      you,” said the general addressing the next petitioner.
    

      “He won’t speak,” thought Tchervyakov, turning pale;
      “that means that he is angry. . . . No, it can’t be left like
      this. . . . I will explain to him.”
    

      When the general had finished his conversation with the last of the
      petitioners and was turning towards his inner apartments, Tchervyakov took
      a step towards him and muttered:
    

      “Your Excellency! If I venture to trouble your Excellency, it is
      simply from a feeling I may say of regret! . . . It was not intentional if
      you will graciously believe me.”
    

      The general made a lachrymose face, and waved his hand.
    

      “Why, you are simply making fun of me, sir,” he said as he
      closed the door behind him.
    

      “Where’s the making fun in it?” thought Tchervyakov,
      “there is nothing of the sort! He is a general, but he can’t
      understand. If that is how it is I am not going to apologise to that fanfaron
      any more! The devil take him. I’ll write a letter to him, but I won’t
      go. By Jove, I won’t.”
    

      So thought Tchervyakov as he walked home; he did not write a letter to the
      general, he pondered and pondered and could not make up that letter. He
      had to go next day to explain in person.
    

      “I ventured to disturb your Excellency yesterday,” he
      muttered, when the general lifted enquiring eyes upon him, “not to
      make fun as you were pleased to say. I was apologising for having
      spattered you in sneezing. . . . And I did not dream of making fun of you.
      Should I dare to make fun of you, if we should take to making fun, then
      there would be no respect for persons, there would be. . . .”
    

      “Be off!” yelled the general, turning suddenly purple, and
      shaking all over.
    

      “What?” asked Tchervyakov, in a whisper turning numb with
      horror.
    

      “Be off!” repeated the general, stamping.
    

      Something seemed to give way in Tchervyakov’s stomach. Seeing
      nothing and hearing nothing he reeled to the door, went out into the
      street, and went staggering along. . . . Reaching home mechanically,
      without taking off his uniform, he lay down on the sofa and died.
    











      A PINK STOCKING
    

A DULL, rainy day.
      The sky is completely covered with heavy clouds, and there is no prospect
      of the rain ceasing. Outside sleet, puddles, and drenched jackdaws.
      Indoors it is half dark, and so cold that one wants the stove heated.
    

      Pavel Petrovitch Somov is pacing up and down his study, grumbling at the
      weather. The tears of rain on the windows and the darkness of the room
      make him depressed. He is insufferably bored and has nothing to do. . . .
      The newspapers have not been brought yet; shooting is out of the question,
      and it is not nearly dinner-time . . . .
    

      Somov is not alone in his study. Madame Somov, a pretty little lady in a
      light blouse and pink stockings, is sitting at his writing table. She is
      eagerly scribbling a letter. Every time he passes her as he strides up and
      down, Ivan Petrovitch looks over her shoulder at what she is writing. He
      sees big sprawling letters, thin and narrow, with all sorts of tails and
      flourishes. There are numbers of blots, smears, and finger-marks. Madame
      Somov does not like ruled paper, and every line runs downhill with horrid
      wriggles as it reaches the margin. . . .
    

      “Lidotchka, who is it you are writing such a lot to?” Somov
      inquires, seeing that his wife is just beginning to scribble the sixth
      page.
    

      “To sister Varya.”
    

      “Hm . . . it’s a long letter! I’m so bored—let me
      read it!”
    

      “Here, you may read it, but there’s nothing interesting in it.”
    

      Somov takes the written pages and, still pacing up and down, begins
      reading. Lidotchka leans her elbows on the back of her chair and watches
      the expression of his face. . . . After the first page his face lengthens
      and an expression of something almost like panic comes into it. . . . At
      the third page Somov frowns and scratches the back of his head. At the
      fourth he pauses, looks with a scared face at his wife, and seems to
      ponder. After thinking a little, he takes up the letter again with a sigh.
      . . . His face betrays perplexity and even alarm. . . .”
    

      “Well, this is beyond anything!” he mutters, as he finishes
      reading the letter and flings the sheets on the table, “It’s
      positively incredible!”
    

      “What’s the matter?” asks Lidotchka, flustered.
    

      “What’s the matter! You’ve covered six pages, wasted a
      good two hours scribbling, and there’s nothing in it at all! If
      there were one tiny idea! One reads on and on, and one’s brain is as
      muddled as though one were deciphering the Chinese wriggles on tea chests!
      Ough!”
    

      “Yes, that’s true, Vanya, . . .” says Lidotchka,
      reddening. “I wrote it carelessly. . . .”
    

      “Queer sort of carelessness! In a careless letter there is some
      meaning and style—there is sense in it—while yours . . .
      excuse me, but I don’t know what to call it! It’s absolute
      twaddle! There are words and sentences, but not the slightest sense in
      them. Your whole letter is exactly like the conversation of two boys:
      ‘We had pancakes to-day! And we had a soldier come to see us!’
      You say the same thing over and over again! You drag it out, repeat
      yourself . . . . The wretched ideas dance about like devils: there’s
      no making out where anything begins, where anything ends. . . . How can
      you write like that?”
    

      “If I had been writing carefully,” Lidotchka says in self
      defence, “then there would not have been mistakes. . . .”
    

      “Oh, I’m not talking about mistakes! The awful grammatical
      howlers! There’s not a line that’s not a personal insult to
      grammar! No stops nor commas—and the spelling . . . brrr! ‘Earth’
      has an a in it!! And the writing! It’s desperate! I’m
      not joking, Lida. . . . I’m surprised and appalled at your letter. .
      . . You mustn’t be angry, darling, but, really, I had no idea you
      were such a duffer at grammar. . . . And yet you belong to a cultivated,
      well-educated circle: you are the wife of a University man, and the
      daughter of a general! Tell me, did you ever go to school?”
    

      “What next! I finished at the Von Mebke’s boarding school. . .
      .”
    

      Somov shrugs his shoulders and continues to pace up and down, sighing.
      Lidotchka, conscious of her ignorance and ashamed of it, sighs too and
      casts down her eyes. . . . Ten minutes pass in silence.
    

      “You know, Lidotchka, it really is awful!” says Somov,
      suddenly halting in front of her and looking into her face with horror.
      “You are a mother . . . do you understand? A mother! How can you
      teach your children if you know nothing yourself? You have a good brain,
      but what’s the use of it if you have never mastered the very
      rudiments of knowledge? There—never mind about knowledge . . . the
      children will get that at school, but, you know, you are very shaky on the
      moral side too! You sometimes use such language that it makes my ears
      tingle!”
    

      Somov shrugs his shoulders again, wraps himself in the folds of his
      dressing-gown and continues his pacing. . . . He feels vexed and injured,
      and at the same time sorry for Lidotchka, who does not protest, but merely
      bKlinks. . . . Both feel oppressed and miserable . . . . Absorbed in their
      woes, they do not notice how time is passing and the dinner hour is
      approaching.
    

      Sitting down to dinner, Somov, who is fond of good eating and of eating in
      peace, drinks a large glass of vodka and begins talking about something
      else. Lidotchka listens and assents, but suddenly over the soup her eyes
      fill with tears and she begins whimpering.
    

      “It’s all mother’s fault!” she says, wiping away
      her tears with her dinner napkin. “Everyone advised her to send me
      to the high school, and from the high school I should have been sure to go
      on to the University!”
    

      “University . . . high school,” mutters Somov. “That’s
      running to extremes, my girl! What’s the good of being a blue
      stocking! A blue stocking is the very deuce! Neither man nor woman, but
      just something midway: neither one thing nor another. . . I hate blue
      stockings! I would never have married a learned woman. . . .”
    

      “There’s no making you out . . .”, says Lidotchka.
      “You are angry because I am not learned, and at the same time you
      hate learned women; you are annoyed because I have no ideas in my letter,
      and yet you yourself are opposed to my studying. . . .”
    

      “You do catch me up at a word, my dear,” yawns Somov, pouring
      out a second glass of vodka in his boredom.
    

      Under the influence of vodka and a good dinner, Somov grows more
      good-humoured, lively, and soft. . . . He watches his pretty wife making
      the salad with an anxious face and a rush of affection for her, of
      indulgence and forgiveness comes over him.
    

      “It was stupid of me to depress her, poor girl . . . ,” he
      thought. “Why did I say such a lot of dreadful things? She is silly,
      that’s true, uncivilised and narrow; but . . . there are two sides
      to the question, and audiatur et altera pars. . . . Perhaps people
      are perfectly right when they say that woman’s shallowness rests on
      her very vocation. Granted that it is her vocation to love her husband, to
      bear children, and to mix salad, what the devil does she want with
      learning? No, indeed!”
    

      At that point he remembers that learned women are usually tedious, that
      they are exacting, strict, and unyielding; and, on the other hand, how
      easy it is to get on with silly Lidotchka, who never pokes her nose into
      anything, does not understand so much, and never obtrudes her criticism.
      There is peace and comfort with Lidotchka, and no risk of being interfered
      with.
    

      “Confound them, those clever and learned women! It’s better
      and easier to live with simple ones,” he thinks, as he takes a plate
      of chicken from Lidotchka.
    

      He recollects that a civilised man sometimes feels a desire to talk and
      share his thoughts with a clever and well-educated woman. “What of
      it?” thinks Somov. “If I want to talk of intellectual
      subjects, I’ll go to Natalya Andreyevna . . . or to Marya
      Frantsovna. . . . It’s very simple! But no, I shan’t go. One
      can discuss intellectual subjects with men,” he finally decides.
    











      AT A SUMMER VILLA
    

“I LOVE YOU.
      You are my life, my happiness—everything to me! Forgive the avowal,
      but I have not the strength to suffer and be silent. I ask not for love in
      return, but for sympathy. Be at the old arbour at eight o’clock this
      evening. . . . To sign my name is unnecessary I think, but do not be
      uneasy at my being anonymous. I am young, nice-looking . . . what more do
      you want?”
    

      When Pavel Ivanitch Vyhodtsev, a practical married man who was spending
      his holidays at a summer villa, read this letter, he shrugged his
      shoulders and scratched his forehead in perplexity.
    

      “What devilry is this?” he thought. “I’m a married
      man, and to send me such a queer . . . silly letter! Who wrote it?”
    

      Pavel Ivanitch turned the letter over and over before his eyes, read it
      through again, and spat with disgust.
    

      “‘I love you’” . . . he said jeeringly. “A
      nice boy she has pitched on! So I’m to run off to meet you in the
      arbour! . . . I got over all such romances and fleurs d’amour
      years ago, my girl. . . . Hm! She must be some reckless, immoral creature.
      . . . Well, these women are a set! What a whirligig—God forgive us!—she
      must be to write a letter like that to a stranger, and a married man, too!
      It’s real demoralisation!”
    

      In the course of his eight years of married life Pavel Ivanitch had
      completely got over all sentimental feeling, and he had received no
      letters from ladies except letters of congratulation, and so, although he
      tried to carry it off with disdain, the letter quoted above greatly
      intrigued and agitated him.
    

      An hour after receiving it, he was lying on his sofa, thinking:
    

      “Of course I am not a silly boy, and I am not going to rush off to
      this idiotic rendezvous; but yet it would be interesting to know who wrote
      it! Hm. . . . It is certainly a woman’s writing. . . . The letter is
      written with genuine feeling, and so it can hardly be a joke. . . . Most
      likely it’s some neurotic girl, or perhaps a widow . . . widows are
      frivolous and eccentric as a rule. Hm. . . . Who could it be?”
    

      What made it the more difficult to decide the question was that Pavel
      Ivanitch had not one feminine acquaintance among all the summer visitors,
      except his wife.
    

      “It is queer . . .” he mused. “‘I love you!’.
      . . When did she manage to fall in love? Amazing woman! To fall in love
      like this, apropos of nothing, without making any acquaintance and finding
      out what sort of man I am. . . . She must be extremely young and romantic
      if she is capable of falling in love after two or three looks at me. . . .
      But . . . who is she?”
    

      Pavel Ivanitch suddenly recalled that when he had been walking among the
      summer villas the day before, and the day before that, he had several
      times been met by a fair young lady with a light blue hat and a turn-up
      nose. The fair charmer had kept looking at him, and when he sat down on a
      seat she had sat down beside him. . . .
    

      “Can it be she?” Vyhodtsev wondered. “It can’t be!
      Could a delicate ephemeral creature like that fall in love with a worn-out
      old eel like me? No, it’s impossible!”
    

      At dinner Pavel Ivanitch looked blankly at his wife while he meditated:
    

      “She writes that she is young and nice-looking. . . . So she’s
      not old. . . . Hm. . . . To tell the truth, honestly I am not so old and
      plain that no one could fall in love with me. My wife loves me! Besides,
      love is blind, we all know. . . .”
    

      “What are you thinking about?” his wife asked him.
    

      “Oh. . . my head aches a little. . .” Pavel Ivanitch said,
      quite untruly.
    

      He made up his mind that it was stupid to pay attention to such a
      nonsensical thing as a love-letter, and laughed at it and at its
      authoress, but—alas!—powerful is the “dacha” enemy
      of mankind! After dinner, Pavel Ivanitch lay down on his bed, and instead
      of going to sleep, reflected:
    

      “But there, I daresay she is expecting me to come! What a silly! I
      can just imagine what a nervous fidget she’ll be in and how her tournure
      will quiver when she does not find me in the arbour! I shan’t go,
      though. . . . Bother her!”
    

      But, I repeat, powerful is the enemy of mankind.
    

      “Though I might, perhaps, just out of curiosity . . .” he was
      musing, half an hour later. “I might go and look from a distance
      what sort of a creature she is. . . . It would be interesting to have a
      look at her! It would be fun, and that’s all! After all, why shouldn’t
      I have a little fun since such a chance has turned up?”
    

      Pavel Ivanitch got up from his bed and began dressing. “What are you
      getting yourself up so smartly for?” his wife asked, noticing that
      he was putting on a clean shirt and a fashionable tie.
    

      “Oh, nothing. . . . I must have a walk. . . . My head aches. . . .
      Hm.”
    

      Pavel Ivanitch dressed in his best, and waiting till eight o’clock,
      went out of the house. When the figures of gaily dressed summer visitors
      of both sexes began passing before his eyes against the bright green
      background, his heart throbbed.
    

      “Which of them is it? . . .” he wondered, advancing
      irresolutely. “Come, what am I afraid of? Why, I am not going to the
      rendezvous! What . . . a fool! Go forward boldly! And what if I go into
      the arbour? Well, well . . . there is no reason I should.”
    

      Pavel Ivanitch’s heart beat still more violently. . . .
      Involuntarily, with no desire to do so, he suddenly pictured to himself
      the half-darkness of the arbour. . . . A graceful fair girl with a little
      blue hat and a turn-up nose rose before his imagination. He saw her,
      abashed by her love and trembling all over, timidly approach him,
      breathing excitedly, and . . . suddenly clasping him in her arms.
    

      “If I weren’t married it would be all right . . .” he
      mused, driving sinful ideas out of his head. “Though . . . for once
      in my life, it would do no harm to have the experience, or else one will
      die without knowing what. . . . And my wife, what will it matter to her?
      Thank God, for eight years I’ve never moved one step away from her.
      . . . Eight years of irreproachable duty! Enough of her. . . . It’s
      positively vexatious. . . . I’m ready to go to spite her!”
    

      Trembling all over and holding his breath, Pavel Ivanitch went up to the
      arbour, wreathed with ivy and wild vine, and peeped into it . . . . A
      smell of dampness and mildew reached him. . . .
    

      “I believe there’s nobody . . .” he thought, going into
      the arbour, and at once saw a human silhouette in the corner.
    

      The silhouette was that of a man. . . . Looking more closely, Pavel
      Ivanitch recognised his wife’s brother, Mitya, a student, who was
      staying with them at the villa.
    

      “Oh, it’s you . . .” he growled discontentedly, as he
      took off his hat and sat down.
    

      “Yes, it’s I” . . . answered Mitya.
    

      Two minutes passed in silence.
    

      “Excuse me, Pavel Ivanitch,” began Mitya: “but might I
      ask you to leave me alone?? . . . I am thinking over the dissertation for
      my degree and . . . and the presence of anybody else prevents my thinking.”
    

      “You had better go somewhere in a dark avenue. . .” Pavel
      Ivanitch observed mildly. “It’s easier to think in the open
      air, and, besides, . . . er . . . I should like to have a little sleep
      here on this seat. . . It’s not so hot here. . . .”
    

      “You want to sleep, but it’s a question of my dissertation . .
      .” Mitya grumbled. “The dissertation is more important.”
    

      Again there was a silence. Pavel Ivanitch, who had given the rein to his
      imagination and was continually hearing footsteps, suddenly leaped up and
      said in a plaintive voice:
    

      “Come, I beg you, Mitya! You are younger and ought to consider me .
      . . . I am unwell and . . . I need sleep. . . . Go away!”
    

      “That’s egoism. . . . Why must you be here and not I? I won’t
      go as a matter of principle.”
    

      “Come, I ask you to! Suppose I am an egoist, a despot and a fool . .
      . but I ask you to go! For once in my life I ask you a favour! Show some
      consideration!”
    

      Mitya shook his head.
    

      “What a beast! . . .” thought Pavel Ivanitch. “That can’t
      be a rendezvous with him here! It’s impossible with him here!”
    

      “I say, Mitya,” he said, “I ask you for the last time. .
      . . Show that you are a sensible, humane, and cultivated man!”
    

      “I don’t know why you keep on so!” . . . said Mitya,
      shrugging his shoulders. “I’ve said I won’t go, and I
      won’t. I shall stay here as a matter of principle. . . .”
    

      At that moment a woman’s face with a turn-up nose peeped into the
      arbour. . . .
    

      Seeing Mitya and Pavel Ivanitch, it frowned and vanished.
    

      “She is gone!” thought Pavel Ivanitch, looking angrily at
      Mitya. “She saw that blackguard and fled! It’s all spoilt!”
    

      After waiting a little longer, he got up, put on his hat and said:
    

      “You’re a beast, a low brute and a blackguard! Yes! A beast!
      It’s mean . . . and silly! Everything is at an end between us!”
    

      “Delighted to hear it!” muttered Mitya, also getting up and
      putting on his hat. “Let me tell you that by being here just now you’ve
      played me such a dirty trick that I’ll never forgive you as long as
      I live.”
    

      Pavel Ivanitch went out of the arbour, and beside himself with rage,
      strode rapidly to his villa. Even the sight of the table laid for supper
      did not soothe him.
    

      “Once in a lifetime such a chance has turned up,” he thought
      in agitation; “and then it’s been prevented! Now she is
      offended . . . crushed!”
    

      At supper Pavel Ivanitch and Mitya kept their eyes on their plates and
      maintained a sullen silence. . . . They were hating each other from the
      bottom of their hearts.
    

      “What are you smiling at?” asked Pavel Ivanitch, pouncing on
      his wife. “It’s only silly fools who laugh for nothing!”
    

      His wife looked at her husband’s angry face, and went off into a
      peal of laughter.
    

      “What was that letter you got this morning?” she asked.
    

      “I? . . . I didn’t get one. . . .” Pavel Ivanitch was
      overcome with confusion. “You are inventing . . . imagination.”
    

      “Oh, come, tell us! Own up, you did! Why, it was I sent you that
      letter! Honour bright, I did! Ha ha!”
    

      Pavel Ivanitch turned crimson and bent over his plate. “Silly jokes,”
      he growled.
    

      “But what could I do? Tell me that. . . . We had to scrub the rooms
      out this evening, and how could we get you out of the house? There was no
      other way of getting you out. . . . But don’t be angry, stupid. . .
      . I didn’t want you to be dull in the arbour, so I sent the same
      letter to Mitya too! Mitya, have you been to the arbour?”
    

      Mitya grinned and left off glaring with hatred at his rival.
    
The House With The Mezzanine,

THE
      HOUSE WITH THE MEZZANINE
    

      (A PAINTER'S STORY)
    

IT happened nigh on seven years ago, when I was
      living in one of the districts of the J. province, on the estate of
      Bielokurov, a landowner, a young man who used to get up early, dress
      himself in a long overcoat, drink beer in the evenings, and all the while
      complain to me that he could nowhere find any one in sympathy with his
      ideas. He lived in a little house in the orchard, and I lived in the old
      manor-house, in a huge pillared hall where there was no furniture except a
      large divan, on which I slept, and a table at which I used to play
      patience. Even in calm weather there was always a moaning in the chimney,
      and in a storm the whole house would rock and seem as though it must
      split, and it was quite terrifying, especially at night, when all the ten
      great windows were suddenly lit up by a flash of lightning.
    

      Doomed by fate to permanent idleness, I did positively nothing. For hours
      together I would sit and look through the windows at the sky, the birds,
      the trees and read my letters over and over again, and then for hours
      together I would sleep. Sometimes I would go out and wander aimlessly
      until evening.
    

      Once on my way home I came unexpectedly on a strange farmhouse. The sun
      was already setting, and the lengthening shadows were thrown over the
      ripening corn. Two rows of closely planted tall fir-trees stood like two
      thick walls, forming a sombre, magnificent avenue. I climbed the fence and
      walked up the avenue, slipping on the fir needles which lay two inches
      thick on the ground. It was still, dark, and only here and there in the
      tops of the trees shimmered a bright gold light casting the colours of the
      rainbow on a spider's web. The smell of the firs was almost suffocating.
      Then I turned into an avenue of limes. And here too were desolation and
      decay; the dead leaves rustled mournfully beneath my feet, and there were
      lurking shadows among the trees. To the right, in an old orchard, a
      goldhammer sang a faint reluctant song, and he too must have been old. The
      lime-trees soon came to an end and I came to a white house with a terrace
      and a mezzanine, and suddenly a vista opened upon a farmyard with a pond
      and a bathing-shed, and a row of green willows, with a village beyond, and
      above it stood a tall, slender belfry, on which glowed a cross catching
      the light of the setting sun. For a moment I was possessed with a sense of
      enchantment, intimate, particular, as though I had seen the scene before
      in my childhood.
    

      By the white-stone gate surmounted with stone lions, which led from the
      yard into the field, stood two girls. One of them, the elder, thin, pale,
      very handsome, with masses of chestnut hair and a little stubborn mouth,
      looked rather prim and scarcely glanced at me; the other, who was quite
      young—seventeen or eighteen, no more, also thin and pale, with a big
      mouth and big eyes, looked at me in surprise, as I passed, said something
      in English and looked confused, and it seemed to me that I had always
      known their dear faces. And I returned home feeling as though I had awoke
      from a pleasant dream.
    

      Soon after that, one afternoon, when Bielokurov and I were walking near
      the house, suddenly there came into the yard a spring-carriage in which
      sat one of the two girls, the elder. She had come to ask for subscriptions
      to a fund for those who had suffered in a recent fire. Without looking at
      us, she told us very seriously how many houses had been burned down in
      Sianov, how many men, women, and children had been left without shelter,
      and what had been done by the committee of which she was a member. She
      gave us the list for us to write our names, put it away, and began to say
      good-bye.
    

      "You have completely forgotten us, Piotr Petrovich," she said to
      Bielokurov, as she gave him her hand. "Come and see us, and if Mr. N. (she
      said my name) would like to see how the admirers of his talent live and
      would care to come and see us, then mother and I would be very pleased."
    

      I bowed.
    

      When she had gone Piotr Petrovich began to tell me about her. The girl, he
      said, was of a good family and her name was Lydia Volchaninov, and the
      estate, on which she lived with her mother and sister, was called, like
      the village on the other side of the pond, Sholkovka. Her father had once
      occupied an eminent position in Moscow and died a privy councillor.
      Notwithstanding their large means, the Volchaninovs always lived in the
      village, summer and winter, and Lydia was a teacher in the Zemstvo School
      at Sholkovka and earned twenty-five roubles a month. She only spent what
      she earned on herself and was proud of her independence.
    

      "They are an interesting family," said Bielokurov. "We ought to go and see
      them. They will be very glad to see you."
    

      One afternoon, during a holiday, we remembered the Volchaninovs and went
      over to Sholkovka. They were all at home. The mother, Ekaterina Pavlovna,
      had obviously once been handsome, but now she was stouter than her age
      warranted, suffered from asthma, was melancholy and absent-minded as she
      tried to entertain me with talk about painting. When she heard from her
      daughter that I might perhaps come over to Sholkovka, she hurriedly called
      to mind a few of my landscapes which she had seen in exhibitions in
      Moscow, and now she asked what I had tried to express in them. Lydia, or
      as she was called at home, Lyda, talked more to Bielokurov than to me.
      Seriously and without a smile, she asked him why he did not work for the
      Zemstvo and why up till now he had never been to a Zemstvo meeting.
    

      "It is not right of you, Piotr Petrovich," she said reproachfully. "It is
      not right. It is a shame."
    

      "True, Lyda, true," said her mother. "It is not right."
    

      "All our district is in Balaguin's hands," Lyda went on, turning to me.
      "He is the chairman of the council and all the jobs in the district are
      given to his nephews and brothers-in-law, and he does exactly as he likes.
      We ought to fight him. The young people ought to form a strong party; but
      you see what our young men are like. It is a shame, Piotr Petrovich."
    

      The younger sister, Genya, was silent during the conversation about the
      Zemstvo. She did not take part in serious conversations, for by the family
      she was not considered grown-up, and they gave her her baby-name,
      Missyuss, because as a child she used to call her English governess that.
      All the time she examined me curiously and when I looked at the
      photograph-album she explained: "This is my uncle.... That is my
      godfather," and fingered the portraits, and at the same time touched me
      with her shoulder in a childlike way, and I could see her small,
      undeveloped bosom, her thin shoulders, her long, slim waist tightly drawn
      in by a belt.
    

      We played croquet and lawn-tennis, walked in the garden, had tea, and then
      a large supper. After the huge pillared hall, I felt out of tune in the
      small cosy house, where there were no oleographs on the walls and the
      servants were treated considerately, and everything seemed to me young and
      pure, through the presence of Lyda and Missyuss, and everything was decent
      and orderly. At supper Lyda again talked to Bielokurov about the Zemstvo,
      about Balaguin, about school libraries. She was a lively, sincere, serious
      girl, and it was interesting to listen to her, though she spoke at length
      and in a loud voice—perhaps because she was used to holding forth at
      school. On the other hand, Piotr Petrovich, who from his university days
      had retained the habit of reducing any conversation to a discussion, spoke
      tediously, slowly, and deliberately, with an obvious desire to be taken
      for a clever and progressive man. He gesticulated and upset the sauce with
      his sleeve and it made a large pool on the table-cloth, though nobody but
      myself seemed to notice it.
    

      When we returned home the night was dark and still.
    

      "I call it good breeding," said Bielokurov, with a sigh, "not so much not
      to upset the sauce on the table, as not to notice it when some one else
      has done it. Yes. An admirable intellectual family. I'm rather out of
      touch with nice people. Ah! terribly. And all through business, business,
      business!"
    

      He went on to say what hard work being a good farmer meant. And I thought:
      What a stupid, lazy lout! When we talked seriously he would drag it out
      with his awful drawl—er, er, er—and he works just as he talks—slowly,
      always behindhand, never up to time; and as for his being businesslike, I
      don't believe it, for he often keeps letters given him to post for weeks
      in his pocket.
    

      "The worst of it is," he murmured as he walked along by my side, "the
      worst of it is that you go working away and never get any sympathy from
      anybody."
    

      II
    

      I began to frequent the Volchaninovs' house. Usually I sat on the bottom
      step of the veranda. I was filled with dissatisfaction, vague discontent
      with my life, which had passed so quickly and uninterestingly, and I
      thought all the while how good it would be to tear out of my breast my
      heart which had grown so weary. There would be talk going on on the
      terrace, the rustling of dresses, the fluttering of the pages of a book. I
      soon got used to Lyda receiving the sick all day long, and distributing
      books, and I used often to go with her to the village, bareheaded, under
      an umbrella. And in the evening she would hold forth about the Zemstvo and
      schools. She was very handsome, subtle, correct, and her lips were thin
      and sensitive, and whenever a serious conversation started she would say
      to me drily:
    

      "This won't interest you."
    

      I was not sympathetic to her. She did not like me because I was a
      landscape-painter, and in my pictures did not paint the suffering of the
      masses, and I seemed to her indifferent to what she believed in. I
      remember once driving along the shore of the Baikal and I met a Bouryat
      girl, in shirt and trousers of Chinese cotton, on horseback: I asked her
      if she would sell me her pipe and, while we were talking, she looked with
      scorn at my European face and hat, and in a moment she got bored with
      talking to me, whooped and galloped away. And in exactly the same way Lyda
      despised me as a stranger. Outwardly she never showed her dislike of me,
      but I felt it, and, as I sat on the bottom step of the terrace, I had a
      certain irritation and said that treating the peasants without being a
      doctor meant deceiving them, and that it is easy to be a benefactor when
      one owns four thousand acres.
    

      Her sister, Missyuss, had no such cares and spent her time in complete
      idleness, like myself. As soon as she got up in the morning she would take
      a book and read it on the terrace, sitting far back in a lounge chair so
      that her feet hardly touched the ground, or she would hide herself with
      her book in the lime-walk, or she would go through the gate into the
      field. She would read all day long, eagerly poring over the book, and only
      through her looking fatigued, dizzy, and pale sometimes, was it possible
      to guess how much her reading exhausted her. When she saw me come she
      would blush a little and leave her book, and, looking into my face with
      her big eyes, she would tell me of things that had happened, how the
      chimney in the servants' room had caught fire, or how the labourer had
      caught a large fish in the pond. On week-days she usually wore a
      bright-coloured blouse and a dark-blue skirt. We used to go out together
      and pluck cherries for jam, in the boat, and when she jumped to reach a
      cherry, or pulled the oars, her thin, round arms would shine through her
      wide sleeves. Or I would make a sketch and she would stand and watch me
      breathlessly.
    

      One Sunday, at the end of June, I went over to the Volchaninovs in the
      morning about nine o'clock. I walked through the park, avoiding the house,
      looking for mushrooms, which were very plentiful that summer, and marking
      them so as to pick them later with Genya. A warm wind was blowing. I met
      Genya and her mother, both in bright Sunday dresses, going home from
      church, and Genya was holding her hat against the wind. They told me they
      were going to have tea on the terrace.
    

      As a man without a care in the world, seeking somehow to justify his
      constant idleness, I have always found such festive mornings in a country
      house universally attractive. When the green garden, still moist with dew,
      shines in the sun and seems happy, and when the terrace smells of
      mignonette and oleander, and the young people have just returned from
      church and drink tea in the garden, and when they are all so gaily dressed
      and so merry, and when you know that all these healthy, satisfied,
      beautiful people will do nothing all day long, then you long for all life
      to be like that. So I thought then as I walked through the garden, quite
      prepared to drift like that without occupation or purpose, all through the
      day, all through the summer.
    

      Genya carried a basket and she looked as though she knew that she would
      find me there. We gathered mushrooms and talked, and whenever she asked me
      a question she stood in front of me to see my face.
    

      "Yesterday," she said, "a miracle happened in our village. Pelagueya, the
      cripple, has been ill for a whole year, and no doctors or medicines were
      any good, but yesterday an old woman muttered over her and she got
      better."
    

      "That's nothing," I said. "One should not go to sick people and old women
      for miracles. Is not health a miracle? And life itself? A miracle is
      something incomprehensible."
    

      "And you are not afraid of the incomprehensible?"
    

      "No. I like to face things I do not understand and I do not submit to
      them. I am superior to them. Man must think himself higher than lions,
      tigers, stars, higher than anything in nature, even higher than that which
      seems incomprehensible and miraculous. Otherwise he is not a man, but a
      mouse which is afraid of everything."
    

      Genya thought that I, as an artist, knew a great deal and could guess what
      I did not know. She wanted me to lead her into the region of the eternal
      and the beautiful, into the highest world, with which, as she thought, I
      was perfectly familiar, and she talked to me of God, of eternal life, of
      the miraculous. And I, who did not admit that I and my imagination would
      perish for ever, would reply: "Yes. Men are immortal. Yes, eternal life
      awaits us." And she would listen and believe me and never asked for proof.
    

      As we approached the house she suddenly stopped and said:
    

      "Our Lyda is a remarkable person, isn't she? I love her dearly and would
      gladly sacrifice my life for her at any time. But tell me"—Genya
      touched my sleeve with her finger—"but tell me, why do you argue
      with her all the time? Why are you so irritated?"
    

      "Because she is not right."
    

      Genya shook her head and tears came to her eyes.
    

      "How incomprehensible!" she muttered.
    

      At that moment Lyda came out, and she stood by the balcony with a
      riding-whip in her hand, and looked very fine and pretty in the sunlight
      as she gave some orders to a farm-hand. Bustling about and talking loudly,
      she tended two or three of her patients, and then with a businesslike,
      preoccupied look she walked through the house, opening one cupboard after
      another, and at last went off to the attic; it took some time to find her
      for dinner and she did not come until we had finished the soup. Somehow I
      remember all these, little details and love to dwell on them, and I
      remember the whole of that day vividly, though nothing particular
      happened. After dinner Genya read, lying in her lounge chair, and I sat on
      the bottom step of the terrace. We were silent. The sky was overcast and a
      thin fine rain began to fall. It was hot, the wind had dropped, and it
      seemed the day would never end. Ekaterina Pavlovna came out on to the
      terrace with a fan, looking very sleepy.
    

      "O, mamma," said Genya, kissing her hand. "It is not good for you to sleep
      during the day."
    

      They adored each other. When one went into the garden, the other would
      stand on the terrace and look at the trees and call: "Hello!" "Genya!" or
      "Mamma, dear, where are you?" They always prayed together and shared the
      same faith, and they understood each other very well, even when they were
      silent. And they treated other people in exactly the same way. Ekaterina
      Pavlovna also soon got used to me and became attached to me, and when I
      did not turn up for a few days she would send to inquire if I was well.
      And she too used to look admiringly at my sketches, and with the same
      frank loquacity she would tell me things that happened, and she would
      confide her domestic secrets to me.
    

      She revered her elder daughter. Lyda never came to her for caresses, and
      only talked about serious things: she went her own way and to her mother
      and sister she was as sacred and enigmatic as the admiral, sitting in his
      cabin, to his sailors.
    

      "Our Lyda is a remarkable person," her mother would often say; "isn't
      she?"
    

      And, now, as the soft rain fell, we spoke of Lyda:
    

      "She is a remarkable woman," said her mother, and added in a low voice
      like a conspirator's as she looked round, "such as she have to be looked
      for with a lamp in broad daylight, though you know, I am beginning to be
      anxious. The school, pharmacies, books—all very well, but why go to
      such extremes? She is twenty-three and it is time for her to think
      seriously about herself. If she goes on with her books and her pharmacies
      she won't know how life has passed.... She ought to marry."
    

      Genya, pale with reading, and with her hair ruffled, looked up and said,
      as if to herself, as she glanced at her mother:
    

      "Mamma, dear, everything depends on the will of God."
    

      And once more she plunged into her book.
    

      Bielokurov came over in a poddiovka, wearing an embroidered shirt.
      We played croquet and lawn-tennis, and when it grew dark we had a long
      supper, and Lyda once more spoke of her schools and Balaguin, who had got
      the whole district into his own hands. As I left the Volchaninovs that
      night I carried away an impression of a long, long idle day, with a sad
      consciousness that everything ends, however long it may be. Genya took me
      to the gate, and perhaps, because she had spent the whole day with me from
      the beginning to end, I felt somehow lonely without her, and the whole
      kindly family was dear to me: and for the first time during the whole of
      that summer I had a desire to work.
    

      "Tell me why you lead such a monotonous life," I asked Bielokurov, as we
      went home. "My life is tedious, dull, monotonous, because I am a painter,
      a queer fish, and have been worried all my life with envy, discontent,
      disbelief in my work: I am always poor, I am a vagabond, but you are a
      wealthy, normal man, a landowner, a gentleman—why do you live so
      tamely and take so little from life? Why, for instance, haven't you fallen
      in love with Lyda or Genya?"
    

      "You forget that I love another woman," answered Bielokurov.
    

      He meant his mistress, Lyabor Ivanovna, who lived with him in the orchard
      house. I used to see the lady every day, very stout, podgy, pompous, like
      a fatted goose, walking in the garden in a Russian head-dress, always with
      a sunshade, and the servants used to call her to meals or tea. Three years
      ago she rented a part of his house for the summer, and stayed on to live
      with Bielokurov, apparently for ever. She was ten years older than he and
      managed him very strictly, so that he had to ask her permission to go out.
      She would often sob and make horrible noises like a man with a cold, and
      then I used to send and tell her that I'm if she did not stop I would go
      away. Then she would stop.
    

      When we reached home, Bielokurov sat down on the divan and frowned and
      brooded, and I began to pace up and down the hall, feeling a sweet
      stirring in me, exactly like the stirring of love. I wanted to talk about
      the Volchaninovs.
    

      "Lyda could only fall in love with a Zemstvo worker like herself, some one
      who is run off his legs with hospitals and schools," I said. "For the sake
      of a girl like that a man might not only become a Zemstvo worker, but
      might even become worn out, like the tale of the iron boots. And Missyuss?
      How charming Missyuss is!"
    

      Bielokurov began to talk at length and with his drawling er-er-ers of the
      disease of the century—pessimism. He spoke confidently and
      argumentatively. Hundreds of miles of deserted, monotonous, blackened
      steppe could not so forcibly depress the mind as a man like that, sitting
      and talking and showing no signs of going away.
    

      "The point is neither pessimism nor optimism," I said irritably, "but that
      ninety-nine out of a hundred have no sense."
    

      Bielokurov took this to mean himself, was offended, and went away.
    

      III
    

      "The Prince is on a visit to Malozyomov and sends you his regards," said
      Lyda to her mother, as she came in and took off her gloves. "He told me
      many interesting things. He promised to bring forward in the Zemstvo
      Council the question of a medical station at Malozyomov, but he says there
      is little hope." And turning to me, she said: "Forgive me, I keep
      forgetting that you are not interested."
    

      I felt irritated.
    

      "Why not?" I asked and shrugged my shoulders. "You don't care about my
      opinion, but I assure you, the question greatly interests me."
    

      "Yes?"
    

      "In my opinion there is absolutely no need for a medical station at
      Malozyomov."
    

      My irritation affected her: she gave a glance at me, half closed her eyes
      and said:
    

      "What is wanted then? Landscapes?"
    

      "Not landscapes either. Nothing is wanted there."
    

      She finished taking off her gloves and took up a newspaper which had just
      come by post; a moment later, she said quietly, apparently controlling
      herself:
    

      "Last week Anna died in childbirth, and if a medical man had been
      available she would have lived. However, I suppose landscape-painters are
      entitled to their opinions."
    

      "I have a very definite opinion, I assure you," said I, and she took
      refuge behind the newspaper, as though she did not wish to listen. "In my
      opinion medical stations, schools, libraries, pharmacies, under existing
      conditions, only lead to slavery. The masses are caught in a vast chain:
      you do not cut it but only add new links to it. That is my opinion."
    

      She looked at me and smiled mockingly, and I went on, striving to catch
      the thread of my ideas.
    

      "It does not matter that Anna should die in childbirth, but it does matter
      that all these Annas, Mavras, Pelagueyas, from dawn to sunset should be
      grinding away, ill from overwork, all their lives worried about their
      starving sickly children; all their lives they are afraid of death and
      disease, and have to be looking after themselves; they fade in youth, grow
      old very early, and die in filth and dirt; their children as they grow up
      go the same way and hundreds of years slip by and millions of people live
      worse than animals—in constant dread of never having a crust to eat;
      but the horror of their position is that they have no time to think of
      their souls, no time to remember that they are made in the likeness of
      God; hunger, cold, animal fear, incessant work, like drifts of snow block
      all the ways to spiritual activity, to the very thing that distinguishes
      man from the animals, and is the only thing indeed that makes life worth
      living. You come to their assistance with hospitals and schools, but you
      do not free them from their fetters; on the contrary, you enslave them
      even more, since by introducing new prejudices into their lives, you
      increase the number of their demands, not to mention the fact that they
      have to pay the Zemstvo for their drugs and pamphlets, and therefore, have
      to work harder than ever."
    

      "I will not argue with you," said Lyda. "I have heard all that." She put
      down her paper. "I will only tell you one thing, it is no good sitting
      with folded hands. It is true, we do not save mankind, and perhaps we do
      make mistakes, but we do what we can and we are right. The highest and
      most sacred truth for an educated being—is to help his neighbours,
      and we do what we can to help. You do not like it, but it is impossible to
      please everybody."
    

      "True, Lyda, true," said her mother.
    

      In Lyda's presence her courage always failed her, and as she talked she
      would look timidly at her, for she was afraid of saying something foolish
      or out of place: and she never contradicted, but would always agree:
      "True, Lyda, true."
    

      "Teaching peasants to read and write, giving them little moral pamphlets
      and medical assistance, cannot decrease either ignorance or mortality,
      just as the light from your windows cannot illuminate this huge garden," I
      said. "You give nothing by your interference in the lives of these people.
      You only create new demands, and a new compulsion to work."
    

      "Ah! My God, but we must do something!" said Lyda exasperatedly, and I
      could tell by her voice that she thought my opinions negligible and
      despised me.
    

      "It is necessary," I said, "to free people from hard physical work. It is
      necessary to relieve them of their yoke, to give them breathing space, to
      save them from spending their whole lives in the kitchen or the byre, in
      the fields; they should have time to take thought of their souls, of God
      and to develop their spiritual capacities. Every human being's salvation
      lies in spiritual activity—in his continual search for truth and the
      meaning of life. Give them some relief from rough, animal labour, let them
      feel free, then you will see how ridiculous at bottom your pamphlets and
      pharmacies are. Once a human being is aware of his vocation, then he can
      only be satisfied with religion, service, art, and not with trifles like
      that."
    

      "Free them from work?" Lyda gave a smile. "Is that possible?"
    

      "Yes.... Take upon yourself a part of their work. If we all, in town and
      country, without exception, agreed to share the work which is being spent
      by mankind in the satisfaction of physical demands, then none of us would
      have to work more than two or three hours a day. If all of us, rich and
      poor, worked three hours a day the rest of our time would be free. And
      then to be still less dependent on our bodies, we should invent machines
      to do the work and we should try to reduce our demands to the minimum. We
      should toughen ourselves and our children should not be afraid of hunger
      and cold, and we should not be anxious about their health, as Anna, Maria,
      Pelagueya were anxious. Then supposing we did not bother about doctors and
      pharmacies, and did away with tobacco factories and distilleries—what
      a lot of free time we should have! We should give our leisure to service
      and the arts. Just as peasants all work together to repair the roads, so
      the whole community would work together to seek truth and the meaning of
      life, and, I am sure of it—truth would be found very soon, man would
      get rid of his continual, poignant, depressing fear of death and even of
      death itself."
    

      "But you contradict yourself," said Lyda. "You talk about service and deny
      education."
    

      "I deny the education of a man who can only use it to read the signs on
      the public houses and possibly a pamphlet which he is incapable of
      understanding—the kind of education we have had from the time of
      Riurik: and village life has remained exactly as it was then. Not
      education is wanted but freedom for the full development of spiritual
      capacities. Not schools are wanted but universities."
    

      "You deny medicine too."
    

      "Yes. It should only be used for the investigation of diseases, as natural
      phenomenon, not for their cure. It is no good curing diseases if you don't
      cure their causes. Remove the chief cause—physical labour, and there
      will be no diseases. I don't acknowledge the science which cures," I went
      on excitedly. "Science and art, when they are true, are directed not to
      temporary or private purposes, but to the eternal and the general—they
      seek the truth and the meaning of life, they seek God, the soul, and when
      they are harnessed to passing needs and activities, like pharmacies and
      libraries, then they only complicate and encumber life. We have any number
      of doctors, pharmacists, lawyers, and highly educated people, but we have
      no biologists, mathematicians, philosophers, poets. All our intellectual
      and spiritual energy is wasted on temporary passing needs.... Scientists,
      writers, painters work and work, and thanks to them the comforts of life
      grow greater every day, the demands of the body multiply, but we are still
      a long way from the truth and man still remains the most rapacious and
      unseemly of animals, and everything tends to make the majority of mankind
      degenerate and more and more lacking in vitality. Under such conditions
      the life of an artist has no meaning and the more talented he is, the more
      strange and incomprehensible his position is, since it only amounts to his
      working for the amusement of the predatory, disgusting animal, man, and
      supporting the existing state of things. And I don't want to work and will
      not.... Nothing is wanted, so let the world go to hell."
    

      "Missyuss, go away," said Lyda to her sister, evidently thinking my words
      dangerous to so young a girl.
    

      Genya looked sadly at her sister and mother and went out.
    

      "People generally talk like that," said Lyda, "when they want to excuse
      their indifference. It is easier to deny hospitals and schools than to
      come and teach."
    

      "True, Lyda, true," her mother agreed.
    

      "You say you will not work," Lyda went on. "Apparently you set a high
      price on your work, but do stop arguing. We shall never agree, since I
      value the most imperfect library or pharmacy, of which you spoke so
      scornfully just now, more than all the landscapes in the world." And at
      once she turned to her mother and began to talk in quite a different tone:
      "The Prince has got very thin, and is much changed since the last time he
      was here. The doctors are sending him to Vichy."
    

      She talked to her mother about the Prince to avoid talking to me. Her face
      was burning, and, in order to conceal her agitation, she bent over the
      table as if she were short-sighted and made a show of reading the
      newspaper. My presence was distasteful to her. I took my leave and went
      home.
    

      IV
    

      All was quiet outside: the village on the other side of the pond was
      already asleep, not a single light was to be seen, and on the pond there
      was only the faint reflection of the stars. By the gate with the stone
      lions stood Genya, waiting to accompany me.
    

      "The village is asleep," I said, trying to see her face in the darkness,
      and I could see her dark sad eyes fixed on me. "The innkeeper and the
      horse-stealers are sleeping quietly, and decent people like ourselves
      quarrel and irritate each other."
    

      It was a melancholy August night—melancholy because it already
      smelled of the autumn: the moon rose behind a purple cloud and hardly
      lighted the road and the dark fields of winter corn on either side. Stars
      fell frequently, Genya walked beside me on the road and tried not to look
      at the sky, to avoid seeing the falling stars, which somehow frightened
      her.
    

      "I believe you are right," she said, trembling in the evening chill. "If
      people could give themselves to spiritual activity, they would soon burst
      everything."
    

      "Certainly. We are superior beings, and if we really knew all the power of
      the human genius and lived only for higher purposes then we should become
      like gods. But this will never be. Mankind will degenerate and of their
      genius not a trace will be left."
    

      When the gate was out of sight Genya stopped and hurriedly shook my hand.
    

      "Good night," she said, trembling; her shoulders were covered only with a
      thin blouse and she was shivering with cold. "Come to-morrow."
    

      I was filled with a sudden dread of being left alone with my inevitable
      dissatisfaction with myself and people, and I, too, tried not to see the
      falling stars.
    

      "Stay with me a little longer," I said. "Please."
    

      I loved Genya, and she must have loved me, because she used to meet me and
      walk with me, and because she looked at me with tender admiration. How
      thrillingly beautiful her pale face was, her thin nose, her arms, her
      slenderness, her idleness, her constant reading. And her mind? I suspected
      her of having an unusual intellect: I was fascinated by the breadth of her
      views, perhaps because she thought differently from the strong, handsome
      Lyda, who did not love me. Genya liked me as a painter, I had conquered
      her heart by my talent, and I longed passionately to paint only for her,
      and I dreamed of her as my little queen, who would one day possess with me
      the trees, the fields, the river, the dawn, all Nature, wonderful and
      fascinating, with whom, as with them, I have felt helpless and useless.
    

      "Stay with me a moment longer," I called. "I implore you."
    

      I took off my overcoat and covered her childish shoulders. Fearing that
      she would look queer and ugly in a man's coat, she began to laugh and
      threw it off, and as she did so, I embraced her and began to cover her
      face, her shoulders, her arms with kisses.
    

      "Till to-morrow," she whispered timidly as though she was afraid to break
      the stillness of the night. She embraced me: "We have no secrets from one
      another. I must tell mamma and my sister.... Is it so terrible? Mamma will
      be pleased. Mamma loves you, but Lyda!"
    

      She ran to the gates.
    

      "Good-bye," she called out.
    

      For a couple of minutes I stood and heard her running. I had no desire to
      go home, there was nothing there to go for. I stood for a while lost in
      thought, and then quietly dragged myself back, to have one more look at
      the house in which she lived, the dear, simple, old house, which seemed to
      look at me with the windows of the mezzanine for eyes, and to understand
      everything. I walked past the terrace, sat down on a bench by the
      lawn-tennis court, in the darkness under an old elm-tree, and looked at
      the house. In the windows of the mezzanine, where Missyuss had her room,
      shone a bright light, and then a faint green glow. The lamp had been
      covered with a shade. Shadows began to move.... I was filled with
      tenderness and a calm satisfaction, to think that I could let myself be
      carried away and fall in love, and at the same time I felt uneasy at the
      thought that only a few yards away in one of the rooms of the house lay
      Lyda who did not love me, and perhaps hated me. I sat and waited to see if
      Genya would come out. I listened attentively and it seemed to me they were
      sitting in the mezzanine.
    

      An hour passed. The green light went out, and the shadows were no longer
      visible. The moon hung high above the house and lit the sleeping garden
      and the avenues: I could distinctly see the dahlias and roses in the
      flower-bed in front of the house, and all seemed to be of one colour. It
      was very cold. I left the garden, picked up my overcoat in the road, and
      walked slowly home.
    

      Next day after dinner when I went to the Volchaninovs', the glass door was
      wide open. I sat down on the terrace expecting Genya to come from behind
      the flower-bed or from one of the avenues, or to hear her voice come from
      out of the rooms; then I went into the drawing-room and the dining-room.
      There was not a soul to be seen. From the dining-room I went down a long
      passage into the hall, and then back again. There were several doors in
      the passage and behind one of them I could hear Lyda's voice:
    

      "To the crow somewhere ... God ..."—she spoke slowly and distinctly,
      and was probably dictating—" ... God sent a piece of cheese.... To
      the crow ... somewhere.... Who is there?" she called out suddenly as she
      heard my footsteps.
    

      "It is I."
    

      "Oh! excuse me. I can't come out just now. I am teaching Masha."
    

      "Is Ekaterina Pavlovna in the garden?"
    

      "No. She and my sister left to-day for my Aunt's in Penga, and in the
      winter they are probably going abroad." She added after a short silence:
      "To the crow somewhere God sent a pi-ece of cheese. Have you got that?"
    

      I went out into the hall, and, without a thought in my head, stood and
      looked out at the pond and the village, and still I heard:
    

      "A piece of cheese.... To the crow somewhere God sent a piece of cheese."
    

      And I left the house by the way I had come the first time, only reversing
      the order, from the yard into the garden, past the house, then along the
      lime-walk. Here a boy overtook me and handed me a note: "I have told my
      sister everything and she insists on my parting from you," I read. "I
      could not hurt her by disobeying. God will give you happiness. If you knew
      how bitterly mamma and I have cried."
    

      Then through the fir avenue and the rotten fence....Over the fields where
      the corn was ripening and the quails screamed, cows and shackled horses
      now were browsing. Here and there on the hills the winter corn was already
      showing green. A sober, workaday mood possessed me and I was ashamed of
      all I had said at the Volchaninovs', and once more it became tedious to go
      on living. I went home, packed my things, and left that evening for
      Petersburg.
    

      I never saw the Volchaninovs again. Lately on my way to the Crimea I met
      Bielokurov at a station. As of old he was in a poddiovka, wearing
      an embroidered shirt, and when I asked after his health, he replied:
      "Quite well, thanks be to God." He began to talk. He had sold his estate
      and bought another, smaller one in the name of Lyabov Ivanovna. He told me
      a little about the Volchaninovs. Lyda, he said, still lived at Sholkovka
      and taught the children in the school; little by little she succeeded in
      gathering round herself a circle of sympathetic people, who formed a
      strong party, and at the last Zemstvo election they drove out Balaguin,
      who up till then had had the whole district in his hands. Of Genya
      Bielokurov said that she did not live at home and he did not know where
      she was.
    

      I have already begun to forget about the house with the mezzanine, and
      only now and then, when I am working or reading, suddenly—without
      rhyme or reason—I remember the green light in the window, and the
      sound of my own footsteps as I walked through the fields that night, when
      I was in love, rubbing my hands to keep them warm. And even more rarely,
      when I am sad and lonely, I begin already to recollect and it seems to me
      that I, too, am being remembered and waited for, and that we shall
      meet....
    

      Missyuss, where are you?
    

TYPHUS
    

IN a smoking-compartment of the mail-train from
      Petrograd to Moscow sat a young lieutenant, Klimov by name. Opposite him
      sat an elderly man with a clean-shaven, shipmaster's face, to all
      appearances a well-to-do Finn or Swede, who all through the journey smoked
      a pipe and talked round and round the same subject.
    

      "Ha! you are an officer! My brother is also an officer, but he is a
      sailor. He is a sailor and is stationed at Kronstadt. Why are you going to
      Moscow?"
    

      "I am stationed there."
    

      "Ha! Are you married?"
    

      "No. I live with my aunt and sister."
    

      "My brother is also an officer, but he is married and has a wife and three
      children. Ha!"
    

      The Finn looked surprised at something, smiled broadly and fatuously as he
      exclaimed, "Ha," and every now and then blew through the stem of his pipe.
      Klimov, who was feeling rather unwell, and not at all inclined to answer
      questions, hated him with all his heart. He thought how good it would be
      to snatch his gurgling pipe out of his hands and throw it under the seat
      and to order the Finn himself into another car.
    

      "They are awful people, these Finns and ... Greeks," he thought. "Useless,
      good-for-nothing, disgusting people. They only cumber the earth. What is
      the good of them?"
    

      And the thought of Finns and Greeks filled him with a kind of nausea. He
      tried to compare them with the French and the Italians, but the idea of
      those races somehow roused in him the notion of organ-grinders, naked
      women, and the foreign oleographs which hung over the chest of drawers in
      his aunt's house.
    

      The young officer felt generally out of sorts. There seemed to be no room
      for his arms and legs, though he had the whole seat to himself; his mouth
      was dry and sticky, his head was heavy and his clouded thoughts seemed to
      wander at random, not only in his head, but also outside it among the
      seats and the people looming in the darkness. Through the turmoil in his
      brain, as through a dream, he heard the murmur of voices, the rattle of
      the wheels, the slamming of doors. Bells, whistles, conductors, the tramp
      of the people on the platforms came oftener than usual. The time slipped
      by quickly, imperceptibly, and it seemed that the train stopped every
      minute at a station as now and then there would come up the sound of
      metallic voices:
    

      "Is the post ready?"
    

      "Ready."
    

      It seemed to him that the stove-neater came in too often to look at the
      thermometer, and that trains never stopped passing and his own train was
      always roaring over bridges. The noise, the whistle, the Finn, the tobacco
      smoke—all mixed with the ominous shifting of misty shapes, weighed
      on Klimov like an intolerable nightmare. In terrible anguish he lifted up
      his aching head, looked at the lamp whose light was encircled with shadows
      and misty spots; he wanted to ask for water, but his dry tongue would
      hardly move, and he had hardly strength enough to answer the Finn's
      questions. He tried to lie down more comfortably and sleep, but he could
      not succeed; the Finn fell asleep several times, woke up and lighted his
      pipe, talked to him with his "Ha!" and went to sleep again; and the
      lieutenant could still not find room for his legs on the seat, and all the
      while the ominous figures shifted before his eyes.
    

      At Spirov he got out to have a drink of water. He saw some people sitting
      at a table eating hurriedly.
    

      "How can they eat?" he thought, trying to avoid the smell of roast meat in
      the air and seeing the chewing mouths, for both seemed to him utterly
      disgusting and made him feel sick.
    

      A handsome lady was talking to a military man in a red cap, and she showed
      magnificent white teeth when she smiled; her smile, her teeth, the lady
      herself produced in Klimov the same impression of disgust as the ham and
      the fried cutlets. He could not understand how the military man in the red
      cap could bear to sit near her and look at her healthy smiling face.
    

      After he had drunk some water, he went back to his place. The Finn sat and
      smoked. His pipe gurgled and sucked like a galoche full of holes in dirty
      weather.
    

      "Ha!" he said with some surprise. "What station is this?"
    

      "I don't know," said Klimov, lying down and shutting his mouth to keep out
      the acrid tobacco smoke.
    

      "When do we get to Tver."
    

      "I don't know. I am sorry, I ... I can't talk. I am not well. I have a
      cold."
    

      The Finn knocked out his pipe against the window-frame and began to talk
      of his brother, the sailor. Klimov paid no more attention to him and
      thought in agony of his soft, comfortable bed, of the bottle of cold
      water, of his sister Katy, who knew so well how to tuck him up and cosset
      him. He even smiled when there flashed across his mind his soldier-servant
      Pavel, taking off his heavy, close-fitting boots and putting water on the
      table. It seemed to him that he would only have to lie on his bed and
      drink some water and his nightmare would give way to a sound, healthy
      sleep.
    

      "Is the post ready?" came a dull voice from a distance.
    

      "Ready," answered a loud, bass voice almost by the very window.
    

      It was the second or third station from Spirov.
    

      Time passed quickly, seemed to gallop along, and there would be no end to
      the bells, whistles, and stops. In despair Klimov pressed his face into
      the corner of the cushion, held his head in his hands, and again began to
      think of his sister Katy and his orderly Pavel; but his sister and his
      orderly got mixed up with the looming figures and whirled about and
      disappeared. His breath, thrown back from the cushion, burned his face,
      and his legs ached and a draught from the window poured into his back,
      but, painful though it was, he refused to change his position.... A heavy,
      drugging torpor crept over him and chained his limbs.
    

      When at length he raised his head, the car was quite light. The passengers
      were putting on their overcoats and moving about. The train stopped.
      Porters in white aprons and number-plates bustled about the passengers and
      seized their boxes. Klimov put on his greatcoat mechanically and left the
      train, and he felt as though it were not himself walking, but some one
      else, a stranger, and he felt that he was accompanied by the heat of the
      train, his thirst, and the ominous, lowering figures which all night long
      had prevented his sleeping. Mechanically he got his luggage and took a
      cab. The cabman charged him one rouble and twenty-five copecks for driving
      him to Povarska Street, but he did not haggle and submissively took his
      seat in the sledge. He could still grasp the difference in numbers, but
      money had no value to him whatever.
    

      At home Klimov was met by his aunt and his sister Katy, a girl of
      eighteen. Katy had a copy-book and a pencil in her hands as she greeted
      him, and he remembered that she was preparing for a teacher's examination.
      He took no notice of their greetings and questions, but gasped from the
      heat, and walked aimlessly through the rooms until he reached his own, and
      then he fell prone on the bed. The Finn, the red cap, the lady with the
      white teeth, the smell of roast meat, the shifting spot in the lamp,
      filled his mind and he lost consciousness and did not hear the frightened
      voices near him.
    

      When he came to himself he found himself in bed, undressed, and noticed
      the water-bottle and Pavel, but it did not make him any more comfortable
      nor easy. His legs and arms, as before, felt cramped, his tongue clove to
      his palate, and he could hear the chuckle of the Finn's pipe.... By the
      bed, growing out of Pavel's broad back, a stout, black-bearded doctor was
      bustling.
    

      "All right, all right, my lad," he murmured. "Excellent, excellent....
      Jist so, jist so...."
    

      The doctor called Klimov "my lad." Instead of "just so," he said "jist
      saow," and instead of "yes," "yies."
    

      "Yies, yies, yies," he said. "Jist saow, jist saow.... Don't be
      downhearted!"
    

      The doctor's quick, careless way of speaking, his well-fed face, and the
      condescending tone in which he said "my lad" exasperated Klimov.
    

      "Why do you call me 'my lad'?" he moaned. "Why this familiarity, damn it
      all?"
    

      And he was frightened by the sound of his own voice. It was so dry, weak,
      and hollow that he could hardly recognise it.
    

      "Excellent, excellent," murmured the doctor, not at all offended. "Yies,
      yies. You mustn't be cross."
    

      And at home the time galloped away as alarmingly quickly as in the
      train.... The light of day in his bedroom was every now and then changed
      to the dim light of evening.... The doctor never seemed to leave the
      bedside, and his "Yies, yies, yies," could be heard at every moment.
      Through the room stretched an endless row of faces; Pavel, the Finn,
      Captain Taroshevich, Sergeant Maximenko, the red cap, the lady with the
      white teeth, the doctor. All of them talked, waved their hands, smoked,
      ate. Once in broad daylight Klimov saw his regimental priest, Father
      Alexander, in his stole and with the host in his hands, standing by the
      bedside and muttering something with such a serious expression as Klimov
      had never seen him wear before. The lieutenant remembered that Father
      Alexander used to call all the Catholic officers Poles, and wishing to
      make the priest laugh, he exclaimed:
    

      "Father Taroshevich, the Poles have fled to the woods."
    

      But Father Alexander, usually a gay, light-hearted man, did not laugh and
      looked even more serious, and made the sign of the cross over Klimov. At
      night, one after the other, there would come slowly creeping in and out
      two shadows. They were his aunt and his sister. The shadow of his sister
      would kneel down and pray; she would bow to the ikon, and her grey shadow
      on the wall would bow, too, so that two shadows prayed to God. And all the
      time there was a smell of roast meat and of the Finn's pipe, but once
      Klimov could detect a distinct smell of incense. He nearly vomited and
      cried:
    

      "Incense! Take it away."
    

      There was no reply. He could only hear priests chanting in an undertone
      and some one running on the stairs.
    

      When Klimov recovered from his delirium there was not a soul in the
      bedroom. The morning sun flared through the window and the drawn curtains,
      and a trembling beam, thin and keen as a sword, played on the
      water-bottle. He could hear the rattle of wheels—that meant there
      was no more snow in the streets. The lieutenant looked at the sunbeam, at
      the familiar furniture and the door, and his first inclination was to
      laugh. His chest and stomach trembled with a sweet, happy, tickling
      laughter. From head to foot his whole body was filled with a feeling of
      infinite happiness, like that which the first man must have felt when he
      stood erect and beheld the world for the first time. Klimov had a
      passionate longing for people, movement, talk. His body lay motionless; he
      could only move his hands, but he hardly noticed it, for his whole
      attention was fixed on little things. He was delighted with his breathing
      and with his laughter; he was delighted with the existence of the
      water-bottle, the ceiling, the sunbeam, the ribbon on the curtain. God's
      world, even in such a narrow corner as his bedroom, seemed to him
      beautiful, varied, great. When the doctor appeared the lieutenant thought
      how nice his medicine was, how nice and sympathetic the doctor was, how
      nice and interesting people were, on the whole.
    

      "Yies, yies, yies," said the doctor. "Excellent, excellent. Now we are
      well again. Jist saow. Jist saow."
    

      The lieutenant listened and laughed gleefully. He remembered the Finn, the
      lady with the white teeth, the train, and he wanted to eat and smoke.
    

      "Doctor," he said, "tell them to bring me a slice of rye bread and salt,
      and some sardines...."
    

      The doctor refused. Pavel did not obey his order and refused to go for
      bread. The lieutenant could not bear it and began to cry like a thwarted
      child.
    

      "Ba-by," the doctor laughed. "Mamma! Hush-aby!"
    

      Klimov also began to laugh, and when the doctor had gone, he fell sound
      asleep. He woke up with the same feeling of joy and happiness. His aunt
      was sitting by his bed.
    

      "Oh, aunty!" He was very happy. "What has been the matter with me?"
    

      "Typhus."
    

      "I say! And now I am well, quite well! Where is Katy?"
    

      "She is not at home. She has probably gone to see some one after her
      examination."
    

      The old woman bent over her stocking as she said this; her lips began to
      tremble; she turned her face away and suddenly began to sob. In her grief,
      she forgot the doctor's orders and cried:
    

      "Oh! Katy! Katy! Our angel is gone from us! She is gone!"
    

      She dropped her stocking and stooped down for it, and her cap fell off her
      head. Klimov stared at her grey hair, could not understand, was alarmed
      for Katy, and asked:
    

      "But where is she, aunty?"
    

      The old woman, who had already forgotten Klimov and remembered only her
      grief, said:
    

      "She caught typhus from you and ... and died. She was buried the day
      before yesterday."
    

      This sudden appalling piece of news came home to Klimov's mind, but
      dreadful and shocking though it was it could not subdue the animal joy
      which thrilled through the convalescent lieutenant. He cried, laughed, and
      soon began to complain that he was given nothing to eat.
    

      Only a week later, when, supported by Pavel, he walked in a dressing-gown
      to the window, and saw the grey spring sky and heard the horrible rattle
      of some old rails being carried by on a lorry, then his heart ached with
      sorrow and he began to weep and pressed his forehead against the
      window-frame.
    

      "How unhappy I am!" he murmured. "My God, how unhappy I am!"
    

      And joy gave way to his habitual weariness and a sense of his irreparable
      loss.
    

GOOSEBERRIES
    

FROM early morning the sky had been overcast with
      clouds; the day was still, cool, and wearisome, as usual on grey, dull
      days when the clouds hang low over the fields and it looks like rain,
      which never comes. Ivan Ivanich, the veterinary surgeon, and Bourkin, the
      schoolmaster, were tired of walking and the fields seemed endless to them.
      Far ahead they could just see the windmills of the village of Mirousky, to
      the right stretched away to disappear behind the village a line of hills,
      and they knew that it was the bank of the river; meadows, green willows,
      farmhouses; and from one of the hills there could be seen a field as
      endless, telegraph-posts, and the train, looking from a distance like a
      crawling caterpillar, and in clear weather even the town. In the calm
      weather when all Nature seemed gentle and melancholy, Ivan Ivanich and
      Bourkin were filled with love for the fields and thought how grand and
      beautiful the country was.
    

      "Last time, when we stopped in Prokofyi's shed," said Bourkin, "you were
      going to tell me a story."
    

      "Yes. I wanted to tell you about my brother."
    

      Ivan Ivanich took a deep breath and lighted his pipe before beginning his
      story, but just then the rain began to fall. And in about five minutes it
      came pelting down and showed no signs of stopping. Ivan Ivanich stopped
      and hesitated; the dogs, wet through, stood with their tails between their
      legs and looked at them mournfully.
    

      "We ought to take shelter," said Bourkin. "Let us go to Aliokhin. It is
      close by."
    

      "Very well."
    

      They took a short cut over a stubble-field and then bore to the right,
      until they came to the road. Soon there appeared poplars, a garden, the
      red roofs of granaries; the river began to glimmer and they came to a wide
      road with a mill and a white bathing-shed. It was Sophino, where Aliokhin
      lived.
    

      The mill was working, drowning the sound of the rain, and the dam shook.
      Round the carts stood wet horses, hanging their heads, and men were
      walking about with their heads covered with sacks. It was wet, muddy, and
      unpleasant, and the river looked cold and sullen. Ivan Ivanich and Bourkin
      felt wet and uncomfortable through and through; their feet were tired with
      walking in the mud, and they walked past the dam to the barn in silence as
      though they were angry with each other.
    

      In one of the barns a winnowing-machine was working, sending out clouds of
      dust. On the threshold stood Aliokhin himself, a man of about forty, tall
      and stout, with long hair, more like a professor or a painter than a
      farmer. He was wearing a grimy white shirt and rope belt, and pants
      instead of trousers; and his boots were covered with mud and straw. His
      nose and eyes were black with dust. He recognised Ivan Ivanich and was
      apparently very pleased.
    

      "Please, gentlemen," he said, "go to the house. I'll be with you in a
      minute."
    

      The house was large and two-storied. Aliokhin lived down-stairs in two
      vaulted rooms with little windows designed for the farm-hands; the
      farmhouse was plain, and the place smelled of rye bread and vodka, and
      leather. He rarely used the reception-rooms, only when guests arrived.
      Ivan Ivanich and Bourkin were received by a chambermaid; such a pretty
      young woman that both of them stopped and exchanged glances.
    

      "You cannot imagine how glad I am to see you, gentlemen," said Aliokhin,
      coming after them into the hall. "I never expected you. Pelagueya," he
      said to the maid, "give my friends a change of clothes. And I will change,
      too. But I must have a bath. I haven't had one since the spring. Wouldn't
      you like to come to the bathing-shed? And meanwhile our things will be got
      ready."
    

      Pretty Pelagueya, dainty and sweet, brought towels and soap, and Aliokhin
      led his guests to the bathing-shed.
    

      "Yes," he said, "it is a long time since I had a bath. My bathing-shed is
      all right, as you see. My father and I put it up, but somehow I have no
      time to bathe."
    

      He sat down on the step and lathered his long hair and neck, and the water
      round him became brown.
    

      "Yes. I see," said Ivan Ivanich heavily, looking at his head.
    

      "It is a long time since I bathed," said Aliokhin shyly, as he soaped
      himself again, and the water round him became dark blue, like ink.
    

      Ivan Ivanich came out of the shed, plunged into the water with a splash,
      and swam about in the rain, flapping his arms, and sending waves back, and
      on the waves tossed white lilies; he swam out to the middle of the pool
      and dived, and in a minute came up again in another place and kept on
      swimming and diving, trying to reach the bottom. "Ah! how delicious!" he
      shouted in his glee. "How delicious!" He swam to the mill, spoke to the
      peasants, and came back, and in the middle of the pool he lay on his back
      to let the rain fall on his face. Bourkin and Aliokhin were already
      dressed and ready to go, but he kept on swimming and diving.
    

      "Delicious," he said. "Too delicious!"
    

      "You've had enough," shouted Bourkin.
    

      They went to the house. And only when the lamp was lit in the large
      drawing-room up-stairs, and Bourkin and Ivan Ivanich, dressed in silk
      dressing-gowns and warm slippers, lounged in chairs, and Aliokhin himself,
      washed and brushed, in a new frock coat, paced up and down evidently
      delighting in the warmth and cleanliness and dry clothes and slippers, and
      pretty Pelagueya, noiselessly tripping over the carpet and smiling
      sweetly, brought in tea and jam on a tray, only then did Ivan Ivanich
      begin his story, and it was as though he was being listened to not only by
      Bourkin and Aliokhin, but also by the old and young ladies and the officer
      who looked down so staidly and tranquilly from the golden frames.
    

      "We are two brothers," he began, "I, Ivan Ivanich, and Nicholai Ivanich,
      two years younger. I went in for study and became a veterinary surgeon,
      while Nicholai was at the Exchequer Court when he was nineteen. Our
      father, Tchimasha-Himalaysky, was a cantonist, but he died with an
      officer's rank and left us his title of nobility and a small estate. After
      his death the estate went to pay his debts. However, we spent our
      childhood there in the country. We were just like peasant's children,
      spent days and nights in the fields and the woods, minded the house,
      barked the lime-trees, fished, and so on.... And you know once a man has
      fished, or watched the thrushes hovering in flocks over the village in the
      bright, cool, autumn days, he can never really be a townsman, and to the
      day of his death he will be drawn to the country. My brother pined away in
      the Exchequer. Years passed and he sat in the same place, wrote out the
      same documents, and thought of one thing, how to get back to the country.
      And little by little his distress became a definite disorder, a fixed idea—to
      buy a small farm somewhere by the bank of a river or a lake.
    

      "He was a good fellow and I loved him, but I never sympathised with the
      desire to shut oneself up on one's own farm. It is a common saying that a
      man needs only six feet of land. But surely a corpse wants that, not a
      man. And I hear that our intellectuals have a longing for the land and
      want to acquire farms. But it all comes down to the six feet of land. To
      leave town, and the struggle and the swim of life, and go and hide
      yourself in a farmhouse is not life—it is egoism, laziness; it is a
      kind of monasticism, but monasticism without action. A man needs, not six
      feet of land, not a farm, but the whole earth, all Nature, where in full
      liberty he can display all the properties and qualities of the free
      spirit.
    

      "My brother Nicholai, sitting in his office, would dream of eating his own
      schi, with its savoury smell floating across the farmyard; and of
      eating out in the open air, and of sleeping in the sun, and of sitting for
      hours together on a seat by the gate and gazing at the field and the
      forest. Books on agriculture and the hints in almanacs were his joy, his
      favourite spiritual food; and he liked reading newspapers, but only the
      advertisements of land to be sold, so many acres of arable and grass land,
      with a farmhouse, river, garden, mill, and mill-pond. And he would dream
      of garden-walls, flowers, fruits, nests, carp in the pond, don't you know,
      and all the rest of it. These fantasies of his used to vary according to
      the advertisements he found, but somehow there was always a
      gooseberry-bush in every one. Not a house, not a romantic spot could he
      imagine without its gooseberry-bush.
    

      "'Country life has its advantages,' he used to say. 'You sit on the
      veranda drinking tea and your ducklings swim on the pond, and everything
      smells good ... and there are gooseberries.'
    

      "He used to draw out a plan of his estate and always the same things were
      shown on it: (a) Farmhouse, (b) cottage, (c)
      vegetable garden, (d) gooseberry-bush. He used to live meagrely and
      never had enough to eat and drink, dressed God knows how, exactly like a
      beggar, and always saved and put his money into the bank. He was terribly
      stingy. It used to hurt me to see him, and I used to give him money to go
      away for a holiday, but he would put that away, too. Once a man gets a
      fixed idea, there's nothing to be done.
    

      "Years passed; he was transferred to another province. He completed his
      fortieth year and was still reading advertisements in the papers and
      saving up his money. Then I heard he was married. Still with the same idea
      of buying a farmhouse with a gooseberry-bush, he married an elderly, ugly
      widow, not out of any feeling for her, but because she had money. With her
      he still lived stingily, kept her half-starved, and put the money into the
      bank in his own name. She had been the wife of a postmaster and was used
      to good living, but with her second husband she did not even have enough
      black bread; she pined away in her new life, and in three years or so gave
      up her soul to God. And my brother never for a moment thought himself to
      blame for her death. Money, like vodka, can play queer tricks with a man.
      Once in our town a merchant lay dying. Before his death he asked for some
      honey, and he ate all his notes and scrip with the honey so that nobody
      should get it. Once I was examining a herd of cattle at a station and a
      horse-jobber fell under the engine, and his foot was cut off. We carried
      him into the waiting-room, with the blood pouring down—a terrible
      business—and all the while he kept on asking anxiously for his foot;
      he had twenty-five roubles in his boot and did not want to lose them."
    

      "Keep to your story," said Bourkin.
    

      "After the death of his wife," Ivan Ivanich continued, after a long pause,
      "my brother began to look out for an estate. Of course you may search for
      five years, and even then buy a pig in a poke. Through an agent my brother
      Nicholai raised a mortgage and bought three hundred acres with a
      farmhouse, a cottage, and a park, but there was no orchard, no
      gooseberry-bush, no duck-pond; there was a river but the water in it was
      coffee-coloured because the estate lay between a brick-yard and a gelatine
      factory. But my brother Nicholai was not worried about that; he ordered
      twenty gooseberry-bushes and settled down to a country life.
    

      "Last year I paid him a visit. I thought I'd go and see how things were
      with him. In his letters my brother called his estate Tchimbarshov Corner,
      or Himalayskoe. I arrived at Himalayskoe in the afternoon. It was hot.
      There were ditches, fences, hedges, rows of young fir-trees, trees
      everywhere, and there was no telling how to cross the yard or where to put
      your horse. I went to the house and was met by a red-haired dog, as fat as
      a pig. He tried to bark but felt too lazy. Out of the kitchen came the
      cook, barefooted, and also as fat as a pig, and said that the master was
      having his afternoon rest. I went in to my brother and found him sitting
      on his bed with his knees covered with a blanket; he looked old, stout,
      flabby; his cheeks, nose, and lips were pendulous. I half expected him to
      grunt like a pig.
    

      "We embraced and shed a tear of joy and also of sadness to think that we
      had once been young, but were now both going grey and nearing death. He
      dressed and took me to see his estate.
    

      "'Well? How are you getting on?' I asked.
    

      "'All right, thank God. I am doing very well.'
    

      "He was no longer the poor, tired official, but a real landowner and a
      person of consequence. He had got used to the place and liked it, ate a
      great deal, took Russian baths, was growing fat, had already gone to law
      with the parish and the two factories, and was much offended if the
      peasants did not call him 'Your Lordship.' And, like a good landowner, he
      looked after his soul and did good works pompously, never simply. What
      good works? He cured the peasants of all kinds of diseases with soda and
      castor-oil, and on his birthday he would have a thanksgiving service held
      in the middle of the village, and would treat the peasants to half a
      bucket of vodka, which he thought the right thing to do. Ah! Those
      horrible buckets of vodka. One day a greasy landowner will drag the
      peasants before the Zembro Court for trespass, and the next, if it's a
      holiday, he will give them a bucket of vodka, and they drink and shout
      Hooray! and lick his boots in their drunkenness. A change to good eating
      and idleness always fills a Russian with the most preposterous
      self-conceit. Nicholai Ivanich who, when he was in the Exchequer, was
      terrified to have an opinion of his own, now imagined that what he said
      was law. 'Education is necessary for the masses, but they are not fit for
      it.' 'Corporal punishment is generally harmful, but in certain cases it is
      useful and indispensable.'
    

      "'I know the people and I know how to treat them,' he would say. 'The
      people love me. I have only to raise my finger and they will do as I
      wish.'
    

      "And all this, mark you, was said with a kindly smile of wisdom. He was
      constantly saying: 'We noblemen,' or 'I, as a nobleman.' Apparently he had
      forgotten that our grandfather was a peasant and our father a common
      soldier. Even our family name, Tchimacha-Himalaysky, which is really an
      absurd one, seemed to him full-sounding, distinguished, and very pleasing.
    

      "But my point does not concern him so much as myself. I want to tell you
      what a change took place in me in those few hours while I was in his
      house. In the evening, while we were having tea, the cook laid a plateful
      of gooseberries on the table. They had not been bought, but were his own
      gooseberries, plucked for the first time since the bushes were planted.
      Nicholai Ivanich laughed with joy and for a minute or two he looked in
      silence at the gooseberries with tears in his eyes. He could not speak for
      excitement, then put one into his mouth, glanced at me in triumph, like a
      child at last being given its favourite toy, and said:
    

      "'How good they are!'
    

      "He went on eating greedily, and saying all the while:
    

      "'How good they are! Do try one!'
    

      "It was hard and sour, but, as Poushkin said, the illusion which exalts us
      is dearer to us than ten thousand truths. I saw a happy man, one whose
      dearest dream had come true, who had attained his goal in life, who had
      got what he wanted, and was pleased with his destiny and with himself. In
      my idea of human life there is always some alloy of sadness, but now at
      the sight of a happy man I was filled with something like despair. And at
      night it grew on me. A bed was made up for me in the room near my
      brother's and I could hear him, unable to sleep, going again and again to
      the plate of gooseberries. I thought: 'After all, what a lot of contented,
      happy people there must be! What an overwhelming power that means! I look
      at this life and see the arrogance and the idleness of the strong, the
      ignorance and bestiality of the weak, the horrible poverty everywhere,
      overcrowding, drunkenness, hypocrisy, falsehood.... Meanwhile in all the
      houses, all the streets, there is peace; out of fifty thousand people who
      live in our town there is not one to kick against it all. Think of the
      people who go to the market for food: during the day they eat; at night
      they sleep, talk nonsense, marry, grow old, piously follow their dead to
      the cemetery; one never sees or hears those who suffer, and all the horror
      of life goes on somewhere behind the scenes. Everything is quiet,
      peaceful, and against it all there is only the silent protest of
      statistics; so many go mad, so many gallons are drunk, so many children
      die of starvation.... And such a state of things is obviously what we
      want; apparently a happy man only feels so because the unhappy bear their
      burden in silence, but for which happiness would be impossible. It is a
      general hypnosis. Every happy man should have some one with a little
      hammer at his door to knock and remind him that there are unhappy people,
      and that, however happy he may be, life will sooner or later show its
      claws, and some misfortune will befall him—illness, poverty, loss,
      and then no one will see or hear him, just as he now neither sees nor
      hears others. But there is no man with a hammer, and the happy go on
      living, just a little fluttered with the petty cares of every day, like an
      aspen-tree in the wind—and everything is all right.'
    

      "That night I was able to understand how I, too, had been content and
      happy," Ivan Ivanich went on, getting up. "I, too, at meals or out
      hunting, used to lay down the law about living, and religion, and
      governing the masses. I, too, used to say that teaching is light, that
      education is necessary, but that for simple folk reading and writing is
      enough for the present. Freedom is a boon, I used to say, as essential as
      the air we breathe, but we must wait. Yes—I used to say so, but now
      I ask: 'Why do we wait?'" Ivan Ivanich glanced angrily at Bourkin. "Why do
      we wait, I ask you? What considerations keep us fast? I am told that we
      cannot have everything at once, and that every idea is realised in time.
      But who says so? Where is the proof that it is so? You refer me to the
      natural order of things, to the law of cause and effect, but is there
      order or natural law in that I, a living, thinking creature, should stand
      by a ditch until it fills up, or is narrowed, when I could jump it or
      throw a bridge over it? Tell me, I say, why should we wait? Wait, when we
      have no strength to live, and yet must live and are full of the desire to
      live!
    

      "I left my brother early the next morning, and from that time on I found
      it impossible to live in town. The peace and the quiet of it oppress me. I
      dare not look in at the windows, for nothing is more dreadful to see than
      the sight of a happy family, sitting round a table, having tea. I am an
      old man now and am no good for the struggle. I commenced late. I can only
      grieve within my soul, and fret and sulk. At night my head buzzes with the
      rush of my thoughts and I cannot sleep.... Ah! If I were young!"
    

      Ivan Ivanich walked excitedly up and down the room and repeated:
    

      "If I were young."
    

      He suddenly walked up to Aliokhin and shook him first by one hand and then
      by the other.
    

      "Pavel Konstantinich," he said in a voice of entreaty, "don't be
      satisfied, don't let yourself be lulled to sleep! While you are young,
      strong, wealthy, do not cease to do good! Happiness does not exist, nor
      should it, and if there is any meaning or purpose in life, they are not in
      our peddling little happiness, but in something reasonable and grand. Do
      good!"
    

      Ivan Ivanich said this with a piteous supplicating smile, as though he
      were asking a personal favour.
    

      Then they all three sat in different corners of the drawing-room and were
      silent. Ivan Ivanich's story had satisfied neither Bourkin nor Aliokhin.
      With the generals and ladies looking down from their gilt frames, seeming
      alive in the firelight, it was tedious to hear the story of a miserable
      official who ate gooseberries.... Somehow they had a longing to hear and
      to speak of charming people, and of women. And the mere fact of sitting in
      the drawing-room where everything—the lamp with its coloured shade,
      the chairs, and the carpet under their feet—told how the very people
      who now looked down at them from their frames once walked, and sat and had
      tea there, and the fact that pretty Pelagueya was near—was much
      better than any story.
    

      Aliokhin wanted very much to go to bed; he had to get up for his work very
      early, about two in the morning, and now his eyes were closing, but he was
      afraid of his guests saying something interesting without his hearing it,
      so he would not go. He did not trouble to think whether what Ivan Ivanich
      had been saying was clever or right; his guests were talking of neither
      groats, nor hay, nor tar, but of something which had no bearing on his
      life, and he liked it and wanted them to go on....
    

      "However, it's time to go to bed," said Bourkin, getting up. "I will wish
      you good night."
    

      Aliokhin said good night and went down-stairs, and left his guests. Each
      had a large room with an old wooden bed and carved ornaments; in the
      corner was an ivory crucifix; and their wide, cool beds, made by pretty
      Pelagueya, smelled sweetly of clean linen.
    

      Ivan Ivanich undressed in silence and lay down.
    

      "God forgive me, a wicked sinner," he murmured, as he drew the clothes
      over his head.
    

      A smell of burning tobacco came from his pipe which lay on the table, and
      Bourkin could not sleep for a long time and was worried because he could
      not make out where the unpleasant smell came from.
    

      The rain beat against the windows all night long.
    

IN EXILE
    

OLD Simeon, whose nickname was Brains, and a young
      Tartar, whose name nobody knew, were sitting on the bank of the river by a
      wood-fire. The other three ferrymen were in the hut. Simeon who was an old
      man of about sixty, skinny and toothless, but broad-shouldered and
      healthy, was drunk. He would long ago have gone to bed, but he had a
      bottle in his pocket and was afraid of his comrades asking him for vodka.
      The Tartar was ill and miserable, and, pulling his rags about him, he went
      on talking about the good things in the province of Simbirsk, and what a
      beautiful and clever wife he had left at home. He was not more than
      twenty-five, and now, by the light of the wood-fire, with his pale,
      sorrowful, sickly face, he looked a mere boy.
    

      "Of course, it is not a paradise here," said Brains, "you see, water, the
      bare bushes by the river, clay everywhere—nothing else.... It is
      long past Easter and there is still ice on the water and this morning
      there was snow...."
    

      "Bad! Bad!" said the Tartar with a frightened look.
    

      A few yards away flowed the dark, cold river, muttering, dashing against
      the holes in the clayey banks as it tore along to the distant sea. By the
      bank they were sitting on, loomed a great barge, which the ferrymen call a
      karbass. Far away and away, flashing out, flaring up, were fires
      crawling like snakes—last year's grass being burned. And behind the
      water again was darkness. Little banks of ice could be heard knocking
      against the barge.... It was very damp and cold....
    

      The Tartar glanced at the sky. There were as many stars as at home, and
      the darkness was the same, but something was missing. At home in the
      Simbirsk province the stars and the sky were altogether different.
    

      "Bad! Bad!" he repeated.
    

      "You will get used to it," said Brains with a laugh. "You are young yet
      and foolish; the milk is hardly dry on your lips, and in your folly you
      imagine that there is no one unhappier than you, but there will come a
      time when you will say: God give every one such a life! Just look at me.
      In a week's time the floods will be gone, and we will fix the ferry here,
      and all of you will go away into Siberia and I shall stay here, going to
      and fro. I have been living thus for the last two-and-twenty years, but,
      thank God, I want nothing. God give everybody such a life."
    

      The Tartar threw some branches onto the fire, crawled near to it and said:
    

      "My father is sick. When he dies, my mother and my wife have promised to
      come here."
    

      "What do you want your mother and your wife for?" asked Brains. "Just
      foolishness, my friend. It's the devil tempting you, plague take him.
      Don't listen to the Evil One. Don't give way to him. When he talks to you
      about women you should answer him sharply: 'I don't want them!' When he
      talks of freedom, you should stick to it and say: 'I don't want it. I want
      nothing! No father, no mother, no wife, no freedom, no home, no love! I
      want nothing.' Plague take 'em all."
    

      Brains took a swig at his bottle and went on:
    

      "My brother, I am not an ordinary peasant. I don't come from the servile
      masses. I am the son of a deacon, and when I was a free man at Rursk, I
      used to wear a frock coat, and now I have brought myself to such a point
      that I can sleep naked on the ground and eat grass. God give such a life
      to everybody. I want nothing. I am afraid of nobody and I think there is
      no man richer or freer than I. When they sent me here from Russia I set my
      teeth at once and said: 'I want nothing!' The devil whispers to me about
      my wife and my kindred, and about freedom and I say to him: 'I want
      nothing!' I stuck to it, and, you see, I live happily and have nothing to
      grumble at. If a man gives the devil the least opportunity and listens to
      him just once, then he is lost and has no hope of salvation: he will be
      over ears in the mire and will never get out. Not only peasants the like
      of you are lost, but the nobly born and the educated also. About fifteen
      years ago a certain nobleman was sent here from Russia. He had had some
      trouble with his brothers and had made a forgery in a will. People said he
      was a prince or a baron, but perhaps he was only a high official—who
      knows? Well, he came here and at once bought a house and land in
      Moukhzyink. 'I want to live by my own work,' said he, 'in the sweat of my
      brow, because I am no longer a nobleman but an exile.' 'Why,' said I. 'God
      help you, for that is good.' He was a young man then, ardent and eager; he
      used to mow and go fishing, and he would ride sixty miles on horseback.
      Only one thing was wrong; from the very beginning he was always driving to
      the post-office at Guyrin. He used to sit in my boat and sigh: 'Ah!
      Simeon, it is a long time since they sent me any money from home.' 'You
      are better without money, Vassili Sergnevich,' said I. 'What's the good of
      it? You just throw away the past, as though it had never happened, as
      though it were only a dream, and start life afresh. Don't listen to the
      devil,' I said, 'he won't do you any good, and he will only tighten the
      noose. You want money now, but in a little while you will want something
      else, and then more and more. If,' said I, 'you want to be happy you must
      want nothing. Exactly.... If,' I said, 'fate has been hard on you and me,
      it is no good asking her for charity and falling at her feet. We must
      ignore her and laugh at her.' That's what I said to him.... Two years
      later I ferried him over and he rubbed his hands and laughed. 'I'm going,'
      said he, 'to Guyrin to meet my wife. She has taken pity on me, she says,
      and she is coming here. She is very kind and good.' And he gave a gasp of
      joy. Then one day he came with his wife, a beautiful young lady with a
      little girl in her arms and a lot of luggage. And Vassili Andreich kept
      turning and looking at her and could not look at her or praise her enough.
      'Yes, Simeon, my friend, even in Siberia people live.' Well, thought I,
      all right, you won't be content. And from that time on, mark you, he used
      to go to Guyrin every week to find out if money had been sent from Russia.
      A terrible lot of money was wasted. 'She stays here,' said he, 'for my
      sake, and her youth and beauty wither away here in Siberia. She shares my
      bitter lot with me,' said he, 'and I must give her all the pleasure I can
      for it....' To make his wife happier he took up with the officials and any
      kind of rubbish. And they couldn't have company without giving food and
      drink, and they must have a piano and a fluffy little dog on the sofa—bad
      cess to it.... Luxury, in a word, all kinds of tricks. My lady did not
      stay with him long. How could she? Clay, water, cold, no vegetables, no
      fruit; uneducated people and drunkards, with no manners, and she was a
      pretty pampered young lady from the metropolis.... Of course she got
      bored. And her husband was no longer a gentleman, but an exile—quite
      a different matter. Three years later, I remember, on the eve of the
      Assumption, I heard shouts from the other bank. I went over in the ferry
      and saw my lady, all wrapped up, with a young gentleman, a government
      official, in a troika.... I ferried them across, they got into the
      carriage and disappeared, and I saw no more of them. Toward the morning
      Vassili Andreich came racing up in a coach and pair. 'Has my wife been
      across, Simeon, with a gentleman in spectacles?' 'She has,' said I, 'but
      you might as well look for the wind in the fields.' He raced after them
      and kept it up for five days and nights. When he came back he jumped on to
      the ferry and began to knock his head against the side and to cry aloud.
      'You see,' said I, 'there you are.' And I laughed and reminded him: 'Even
      in Siberia people live.' But he went on beating his head harder than
      ever.... Then he got the desire for freedom. His wife had gone to Russia
      and he longed to go there to see her and take her away from her lover. And
      he began to go to the post-office every day, and then to the authorities
      of the town. He was always sending applications or personally handing them
      to the authorities, asking to have his term remitted and to be allowed to
      go, and he told me that he had spent over two hundred roubles on
      telegrams. He sold his land and mortgaged his house to the money-lenders.
      His hair went grey, he grew round-shouldered, and his face got yellow and
      consumptive-looking. He used to cough whenever he spoke and tears used to
      come to his eyes. He spent eight years on his applications, and at last he
      became happy again and lively: he had thought of a new dodge. His
      daughter, you see, had grown up. He doted on her and could never take his
      eyes off her. And, indeed, she was very pretty, dark and clever. Every
      Sunday he used to go to church with her at Guyrin. They would stand side
      by side on the ferry, and she would smile and he would devour her with his
      eyes. 'Yes, Simeon,' he would say. 'Even in Siberia people live. Even in
      Siberia there is happiness. Look what a fine daughter I have. You wouldn't
      find one like her in a thousand miles' journey.' 'She's a nice girl,' said
      I. 'Oh, yes.' ... And I thought to myself: 'You wait.... She is young.
      Young blood will have its way; she wants to live and what life is there
      here?' And she began to pine away.... Wasting, wasting away, she withered
      away, fell ill and had to keep to her bed.... Consumption. That's Siberian
      happiness, plague take it; that's Siberian life.... He rushed all over the
      place after the doctors and dragged them home with him. If he heard of a
      doctor or a quack three hundred miles off he would rush off after him. He
      spent a terrific amount of money on doctors and I think it would have been
      much better spent on drink. All the same she had to die. No help for it.
      Then it was all up with him. He thought of hanging himself, and of trying
      to escape to Russia. That would be the end of him. He would try to escape:
      he would be caught, tried, penal servitude, flogging."
    

      "Good! Good!" muttered the Tartar with a shiver.
    

      "What is good?" asked Brains.
    

      "Wife and daughter. What does penal servitude and suffering matter? He saw
      his wife and his daughter. You say one should want nothing. But nothing—is
      evil! His wife spent three years with him. God gave him that. Nothing is
      evil, and three years is good. Why don't you understand that?"
    

      Trembling and stammering as he groped for Russian words, of which he knew
      only a few, the Tartar began to say: "God forbid he should fall ill among
      strangers, and die and be buried in the cold sodden earth, and then, if
      his wife could come to him if only for one day or even for one hour, he
      would gladly endure any torture for such happiness, and would even thank
      God. Better one day of happiness than nothing."
    

      Then once more he said what a beautiful clever wife he had left at home,
      and with his head in his hands he began to cry and assured Simeon that he
      was innocent, and had been falsely accused. His two brothers and his uncle
      had stolen some horses from a peasant and beat the old man nearly to
      death, and the community never looked into the matter at all, and judgment
      was passed by which all three brothers were exiled to Siberia, while his
      uncle, a rich man, remained at home.
    

      "You will get used to it," said Simeon.
    

      The Tartar relapsed into silence and stared into the fire with his eyes
      red from weeping; he looked perplexed and frightened, as if he could not
      understand why he was in the cold and the darkness, among strangers, and
      not in the province of Simbirsk. Brains lay down near the fire, smiled at
      something, and began to say in an undertone:
    

      "But what a joy she must be to your father," he muttered after a pause.
      "He loves her and she is a comfort to him, eh? But, my man, don't tell me.
      He is a strict, harsh old man. And girls don't want strictness; they want
      kisses and laughter, scents and pomade. Yes.... Ah! What a life!" Simeon
      swore heavily. "No more vodka! That means bedtime. What? I'm going, my
      man."
    

      Left alone, the Tartar threw more branches on the fire, lay down, and,
      looking into the blaze, began to think of his native village and of his
      wife; if she could come if only for a month, or even a day, and then, if
      she liked, go back again! Better a month or even a day, than nothing. But
      even if his wife kept her promise and came, how could he provide for her?
      Where was she to live?
    

      "If there is nothing to eat; how are we to live?" asked the Tartar aloud.
    

      For working at the oars day and night he was paid two copecks a day; the
      passengers gave tips, but the ferrymen shared them out and gave nothing to
      the Tartar, and only laughed at him. And he was poor, cold, hungry, and
      fearful.... With his whole body aching and shivering he thought it would
      be good to go into the hut and sleep; but there was nothing to cover
      himself with, and it was colder there than on the bank. He had nothing to
      cover himself with there, but he could make up a fire....
    

      In a week's time, when the floods had subsided and the ferry would be
      fixed up, all the ferrymen except Simeon would not be wanted any longer
      and the Tartar would have to go from village to village, begging and
      looking for work. His wife was only seventeen; beautiful, soft, and
      shy.... Could she go unveiled begging through the villages? No. The idea
      of it was horrible.
    

      It was already dawn. The barges, the bushy willows above the water, the
      swirling flood began to take shape, and up above in a clayey cliff a hut
      thatched with straw, and above that the straggling houses of the village,
      where the cocks had begun to crow.
    

      The ginger-coloured clay cliff, the barge, the river, the strange wild
      people, hunger, cold, illness—perhaps all these things did not
      really exist. Perhaps, thought the Tartar, it was only a dream. He felt
      that he must be asleep, and he heard his own snoring.... Certainly he was
      at home in the Simbirsk province; he had but to call his wife and she
      would answer; and his mother was in the next room.... But what awful
      dreams there are! Why? The Tartar smiled and opened his eyes. What river
      was that? The Volga?
    

      It was snowing.
    

      "Hi! Ferry!" some one shouted on the other bank. "Karba-a-ass!"
    

      The Tartar awoke and went to fetch his mates to row over to the other
      side. Hurrying into their sheepskins, swearing sleepily in hoarse voices,
      and shivering from the cold, the four men appeared on the bank. After
      their sleep, the river from which there came a piercing blast, seemed to
      them horrible and disgusting. They stepped slowly into the barge.... The
      Tartar and the three ferrymen took the long, broad-bladed oars, which in
      the dim light looked like a crab's claw, and Simeon flung himself with his
      belly against the tiller. And on the other side the voice kept on
      shouting, and a revolver was fired twice, for the man probably thought the
      ferrymen were asleep or gone to the village inn.
    

      "All right. Plenty of time!" said Brains in the tone of one who was
      convinced that there is no need for hurry in this world—and indeed
      there is no reason for it.
    

      The heavy, clumsy barge left the bank and heaved through the willows, and
      by the willows slowly receding it was possible to tell that the barge was
      moving. The ferrymen plied the oars with a slow measured stroke; Brains
      hung over the tiller with his stomach pressed against it and swung from
      side to side. In the dim light they looked like men sitting on some
      antediluvian animal with long limbs, swimming out to a cold dismal
      nightmare country.
    

      They got clear of the willows and swung out into mid-stream. The thud of
      the oars and the splash could be heard on the other bank and shouts came:
      "Quicker! Quicker!" After another ten minutes the barge bumped heavily
      against the landing-stage.
    

      "And it is still snowing, snowing all the time," Simeon murmured, wiping
      the snow off his face. "God knows where it comes from!"
    

      On the other side a tall, lean old man was waiting in a short fox-fur coat
      and a white astrachan hat. He was standing some distance from his horses
      and did not move; he had a stern concentrated expression as if he were
      trying to remember something and were furious with his recalcitrant
      memory. When Simeon went up to him and took off his hat with a smile he
      said:
    

      "I'm in a hurry to get to Anastasievka. My daughter is worse again and
      they tell me there's a new doctor at Anastasievka."
    

      The coach was clamped onto the barge and they rowed back. All the while as
      they rowed the man, whom Simeon called Vassili Andreich, stood motionless,
      pressing his thick lips tight and staring in front of him. When the driver
      craved leave to smoke in his presence, he answered nothing, as if he did
      not hear. And Simeon hung over the rudder and looked at him mockingly and
      said:
    

      "Even in Siberia people live. L-i-v-e!"
    

      On Brains's face was a triumphant expression as if he were proving
      something, as if pleased that things had happened just as he thought they
      would. The unhappy, helpless look of the man in the fox-fur coat seemed to
      give him great pleasure.
    

      "The roads are now muddy, Vassili Andreich," he said, when the horses had
      been harnessed on the bank. "You'd better wait a couple of weeks, until it
      gets dryer.... If there were any point in going—but you know
      yourself that people are always on the move day and night and there's no
      point in it. Sure!"
    

      Vassili Andreich said nothing, gave him a tip, took his seat in the coach
      and drove away.
    

      "Look! He's gone galloping after the doctor!" said Simeon, shivering in
      the cold. "Yes. To look for a real doctor, trying to overtake the wind in
      the fields, and catch the devil by the tail, plague take him! What queer
      fish there are! God forgive me, a miserable sinner."
    

      The Tartar went up to Brains, and, looking at him with mingled hatred and
      disgust, trembling, and mixing Tartar words up with his broken Russian,
      said:
    

      "He good ... good. And you ... bad! You are bad! The gentleman is a good
      soul, very good, and you are a beast, you are bad! The gentleman is alive
      and you are dead.... God made man that he should be alive, that he should
      have happiness, sorrow, grief, and you want nothing, so you are not alive,
      but a stone! A stone wants nothing and so do you.... You are a stone—and
      God does not love you and the gentleman he does."
    

      They all began to laugh: the Tartar furiously knit his brows, waved his
      hand, drew his rags round him and went to the fire. The ferrymen and
      Simeon went slowly to the hut.
    

      "It's cold," said one of the ferrymen hoarsely, as he stretched himself on
      the straw with which the damp, clay floor was covered.
    

      "Yes. It's not warm," another agreed.... "It's a hard life."
    

      All of them lay down. The wind blew the door open. The snow drifted into
      the hut. Nobody could bring himself to get up and shut the door; it was
      cold, but they put up with it.
    

      "And I am happy," muttered Simeon as he fell asleep. "God give such a life
      to everybody."
    

      "You certainly are the devil's own. Even the devil don't need to take
      you."
    

      Sounds like the barking of a dog came from outside.
    

      "Who is that? Who is there?"
    

      "It's the Tartar crying."
    

      "Oh! he's a queer fish."
    

      "He'll get used to it!" said Simeon, and at once he fell asleep. Soon the
      others slept too and the door was left open.
    

THE
      LADY WITH THE TOY DOG
    

IT was reported that a new face had been seen on
      the quay; a lady with a little dog. Dimitri Dimitrich Gomov, who had been
      a fortnight at Talta and had got used to it, had begun to show an interest
      in new faces. As he sat in the pavilion at Verné's he saw a young
      lady, blond and fairly tall, and wearing a broad-brimmed hat, pass along
      the quay. After her ran a white Pomeranian.
    

      Later he saw her in the park and in the square several times a day. She
      walked by herself, always in the same broad-brimmed hat, and with this
      white dog. Nobody knew who she was, and she was spoken of as the lady with
      the toy dog.
    

      "If," thought Gomov, "if she is here without a husband or a friend, it
      would be as well to make her acquaintance."
    

      He was not yet forty, but he had a daughter of twelve and two boys at
      school. He had married young, in his second year at the University, and
      now his wife seemed half as old again as himself. She was a tall woman,
      with dark eyebrows, erect, grave, stolid, and she thought herself an
      intellectual woman. She read a great deal, called her husband not Dimitri,
      but Demitri, and in his private mind he thought her short-witted,
      narrow-minded, and ungracious. He was afraid of her and disliked being at
      home. He had begun to betray her with other women long ago, betrayed her
      frequently, and, probably for that reason nearly always spoke ill of
      women, and when they were discussed in his presence he would maintain that
      they were an inferior race.
    

      It seemed to him that his experience was bitter enough to give him the
      right to call them any name he liked, but he could not live a couple of
      days without the "inferior race." With men he was bored and ill at ease,
      cold and unable to talk, but when he was with women, he felt easy and knew
      what to talk about, and how to behave, and even when he was silent with
      them he felt quite comfortable. In his appearance as in his character,
      indeed in his whole nature, there was something attractive, indefinable,
      which drew women to him and charmed them; he knew it, and he, too, was
      drawn by some mysterious power to them.
    

      His frequent, and, indeed, bitter experiences had taught him long ago that
      every affair of that kind, at first a divine diversion, a delicious smooth
      adventure, is in the end a source of worry for a decent man, especially
      for men like those at Moscow who are slow to move, irresolute,
      domesticated, for it becomes at last an acute and extraordinary
      complicated problem and a nuisance. But whenever he met and was interested
      in a new woman, then his experience would slip away from his memory, and
      he would long to live, and everything would seem so simple and amusing.
    

      And it so happened that one evening he dined in the gardens, and the lady
      in the broad-brimmed hat came up at a leisurely pace and sat at the next
      table. Her expression, her gait, her dress, her coiffure told him that she
      belonged to society, that she was married, that she was paying her first
      visit to Talta, that she was alone, and that she was bored.... There is a
      great deal of untruth in the gossip about the immorality of the place. He
      scorned such tales, knowing that they were for the most part concocted by
      people who would be only too ready to sin if they had the chance, but when
      the lady sat down at the next table, only a yard or two away from him, his
      thoughts were filled with tales of easy conquests, of trips to the
      mountains; and he was suddenly possessed by the alluring idea of a quick
      transitory liaison, a moment's affair with an unknown woman whom he knew
      not even by name.
    

      He beckoned to the little dog, and when it came up to him, wagged his
      finger at it. The dog began to growl. Gomov again wagged his finger.
    

      The lady glanced at him and at once cast her eyes down.
    

      "He won't bite," she said and blushed.
    

      "May I give him a bone?"—and when she nodded emphatically, he asked
      affably: "Have you been in Talta long?"
    

      "About five days."
    

      "And I am just dragging through my second week."
    

      They were silent for a while.
    

      "Time goes quickly," she said, "and it is amazingly boring here."
    

      "It is the usual thing to say that it is boring here. People live quite
      happily in dull holes like Bieliev or Zhidra, but as soon as they come
      here they say: 'How boring it is! The very dregs of dullness!' One would
      think they came from Spain."
    

      She smiled. Then both went on eating in silence as though they did not
      know each other; but after dinner they went off together—and then
      began an easy, playful conversation as though they were perfectly happy,
      and it was all one to them where they went or what they talked of. They
      walked and talked of how the sea was strangely luminous; the water lilac,
      so soft and warm, and athwart it the moon cast a golden streak. They said
      how stifling it was after the hot day. Gomov told her how he came from
      Moscow and was a philologist by education, but in a bank by profession;
      and how he had once wanted to sing in opera, but gave it up; and how he
      had two houses in Moscow.... And from her he learned that she came from
      Petersburg, was born there, but married at S. where she had been living
      for the last two years; that she would stay another month at Talta, and
      perhaps her husband would come for her, because, he too, needed a rest.
      She could not tell him what her husband was—Provincial
      Administration or Zemstvo Council—and she seemed to think it funny.
      And Gomov found out that her name was Anna Sergueyevna.
    

      In his room at night, he thought of her and how they would meet next day.
      They must do so. As he was going to sleep, it struck him that she could
      only lately have left school, and had been at her lessons even as his
      daughter was then; he remembered how bashful and gauche she was when she
      laughed and talked with a stranger—it must be, he thought, the first
      time she had been alone, and in such a place with men walking after her
      and looking at her and talking to her, all with the same secret purpose
      which she could not but guess. He thought of her slender white neck and
      her pretty, grey eyes.
    

      "There is something touching about her," he thought as he began to fall
      asleep.
    

      II
    

      A week passed. It was a blazing day. Indoors it was stifling, and in the
      streets the dust whirled along. All day long he was plagued with thirst
      and he came into the pavilion every few minutes and offered Anna
      Sergueyevna an iced drink or an ice. It was impossibly hot.
    

      In the evening, when the air was fresher, they walked to the jetty to see
      the steamer come in. There was quite a crowd all gathered to meet
      somebody, for they carried bouquets. And among them were clearly marked
      the peculiarities of Talta: the elderly ladies were youngly dressed and
      there were many generals.
    

      The sea was rough and the steamer was late, and before it turned into the
      jetty it had to do a great deal of manœuvring. Anna Sergueyevna
      looked through her lorgnette at the steamer and the passengers as though
      she were looking for friends, and when she turned to Gomov, her eyes
      shone. She talked much and her questions were abrupt, and she forgot what
      she had said; and then she lost her lorgnette in the crowd.
    

      The well-dressed people went away, the wind dropped, and Gomov and Anna
      Sergueyevna stood as though they were waiting for somebody to come from
      the steamer. Anna Sergueyevna was silent. She smelled her flowers and did
      not look at Gomov.
    

      "The weather has got pleasanter toward evening," he said. "Where shall we
      go now? Shall we take a carriage?"
    

      She did not answer.
    

      He fixed his eyes on her and suddenly embraced her and kissed her lips,
      and he was kindled with the perfume and the moisture of the flowers; at
      once he started and looked round; had not some one seen?
    

      "Let us go to your—" he murmured.
    

      And they walked quickly away.
    

      Her room was stifling, and smelled of scents which she had bought at the
      Japanese shop. Gomov looked at her and thought: "What strange chances
      there are in life!" From the past there came the memory of earlier
      good-natured women, gay in their love, grateful to him for their
      happiness, short though it might be; and of others—like his wife—who
      loved without sincerity, and talked overmuch and affectedly, hysterically,
      as though they were protesting that it was not love, nor passion, but
      something more important; and of the few beautiful cold women, into whose
      eyes there would flash suddenly a fierce expression, a stubborn desire to
      take, to snatch from life more than it can give; they were no longer in
      their first youth, they were capricious, unstable, domineering, imprudent,
      and when Gomov became cold toward them then their beauty roused him to
      hatred, and the lace on their lingerie reminded him of the scales of fish.
    

      But here there was the shyness and awkwardness of inexperienced youth, a
      feeling of constraint; an impression of perplexity and wonder, as though
      some one had suddenly knocked at the door. Anna Sergueyevna, "the lady
      with the toy dog" took what had happened somehow seriously, with a
      particular gravity, as though thinking that this was her downfall and very
      strange and improper. Her features seemed to sink and wither, and on
      either side of her face her long hair hung mournfully down; she sat
      crestfallen and musing, exactly like a woman taken in sin in some old
      picture.
    

      "It is not right," she said. "You are the first to lose respect for me."
    

      There was a melon on the table. Gomov cut a slice and began to eat it
      slowly. At least half an hour passed in silence.
    

      Anna Sergueyevna was very touching; she irradiated the purity of a simple,
      devout, inexperienced woman; the solitary candle on the table hardly
      lighted her face, but it showed her very wretched.
    

      "Why should I cease to respect you?" asked Gomov. "You don't know what you
      are saying."
    

      "God forgive me!" she said, and her eyes filled with tears. "It is
      horrible."
    

      "You seem to want to justify yourself."
    

      "How can I justify myself? I am a wicked, low woman and I despise myself.
      I have no thought of justifying myself. It is not my husband that I have
      deceived, but myself. And not only now but for a long time past. My
      husband may be a good honest man, but he is a lackey. I do not know what
      work he does, but I do know that he is a lackey in his soul. I was twenty
      when I married him. I was overcome by curiosity. I longed for something.
      'Surely,' I said to myself, 'there is another kind of life.' I longed to
      live! To live, and to live.... Curiosity burned me up.... You do not
      understand it, but I swear by God, I could no longer control myself.
      Something strange was going on in me. I could not hold myself in. I told
      my husband that I was ill and came here.... And here I have been walking
      about dizzily, like a lunatic.... And now I have become a low, filthy
      woman whom everybody may despise."
    

      Gomov was already bored; her simple words irritated him with their
      unexpected and inappropriate repentance; but for the tears in her eyes he
      might have thought her to be joking or playing a part.
    

      "I do not understand," he said quietly. "What do you want?"
    

      She hid her face in his bosom and pressed close to him.
    

      "Believe, believe me, I implore you," she said. "I love a pure, honest
      life, and sin is revolting to me. I don't know myself what I am doing.
      Simple people say: 'The devil entrapped me,' and I can say of myself: 'The
      Evil One tempted me.'"
    

      "Don't, don't," he murmured.
    

      He looked into her staring, frightened eyes, kissed her, spoke quietly and
      tenderly, and gradually quieted her and she was happy again, and they both
      began to laugh.
    

      Later, when they went out, there was not a soul on the quay; the town with
      its cypresses looked like a city of the dead, but the sea still roared and
      broke against the shore; a boat swung on the waves; and in it sleepily
      twinkled the light of a lantern.
    

      They found a cab and drove out to the Oreanda.
    

      "Just now in the hall," said Gomov, "I discovered your name written on the
      board—von Didenitz. Is your husband a German?"
    

      "No. His grandfather, I believe, was a German, but he himself is an
      Orthodox Russian."
    

      At Oreanda they sat on a bench, not far from the church, looked down at
      the sea and were silent. Talta was hardly visible through the morning
      mist. The tops of the hills were shrouded in motionless white clouds. The
      leaves of the trees never stirred, the cicadas trilled, and the monotonous
      dull sound of the sea, coming up from below, spoke of the rest, the
      eternal sleep awaiting us. So the sea roared when there was neither Talta
      nor Oreanda, and so it roars and will roar, dully, indifferently when we
      shall be no more. And in this continual indifference to the life and death
      of each of us, lives pent up, the pledge of our eternal salvation, of the
      uninterrupted movement of life on earth and its unceasing perfection.
      Sitting side by side with a young woman, who in the dawn seemed so
      beautiful, Gomov, appeased and enchanted by the sight of the fairy scene,
      the sea, the mountains, the clouds, the wide sky, thought how at bottom,
      if it were thoroughly explored, everything on earth was beautiful,
      everything, except what we ourselves think and do when we forget the
      higher purposes of life and our own human dignity.
    

      A man came up—a coast-guard—gave a look at them, then went
      away. He, too, seemed mysterious and enchanted. A steamer came over from
      Feodossia, by the light of the morning star, its own lights already put
      out.
    

      "There is dew on the grass," said Anna Sergueyevna after a silence.
    

      "Yes. It is time to go home."
    

      They returned to the town.
    

      Then every afternoon they met on the quay, and lunched together, dined,
      walked, enjoyed the sea. She complained that she slept badly, that her
      heart beat alarmingly. She would ask the same question over and over
      again, and was troubled now by jealousy, now by fear that he did not
      sufficiently respect her. And often in the square or the gardens, when
      there was no one near, he would draw her close and kiss her passionately.
      Their complete idleness, these kisses in the full daylight, given timidly
      and fearfully lest any one should see, the heat, the smell of the sea and
      the continual brilliant parade of leisured, well-dressed, well-fed people
      almost regenerated him. He would tell Anna Sergueyevna how delightful she
      was, how tempting. He was impatiently passionate, never left her side, and
      she would often brood, and even asked him to confess that he did not
      respect her, did not love her at all, and only saw in her a loose woman.
      Almost every evening, rather late, they would drive out of the town, to
      Oreanda, or to the waterfall; and these drives were always delightful, and
      the impressions won during them were always beautiful and sublime.
    

      They expected her husband to come. But he sent a letter in which he said
      that his eyes were bad and implored his wife to come home. Anna
      Sergueyevna began to worry.
    

      "It is a good thing I am going away," she would say to Gomov. "It is
      fate."
    

      She went in a carriage and he accompanied her. They drove for a whole day.
      When she took her seat in the car of an express-train and when the second
      bell sounded, she said:
    

      "Let me have another look at you.... Just one more look. Just as you are."
    

      She did not cry, but was sad and low-spirited, and her lips trembled.
    

      "I will think of you—often," she said. "Good-bye. Good-bye. Don't
      think ill of me. We part for ever. We must, because we ought not to have
      met at all. Now, good-bye."
    

      The train moved off rapidly. Its lights disappeared, and in a minute or
      two the sound of it was lost, as though everything were agreed to put an
      end to this sweet, oblivious madness. Left alone on the platform, looking
      into the darkness, Gomov heard the trilling of the grasshoppers and the
      humming of the telegraph-wires, and felt as though he had just woke up.
      And he thought that it had been one more adventure, one more affair, and
      it also was finished and had left only a memory. He was moved, sad, and
      filled with a faint remorse; surely the young woman, whom he would never
      see again, had not been happy with him; he had been kind to her, friendly,
      and sincere, but still in his attitude toward her, in his tone and
      caresses, there had always been a thin shadow of raillery, the rather
      rough arrogance of the successful male aggravated by the fact that he was
      twice as old as she. And all the time she had called him kind, remarkable,
      noble, so that he was never really himself to her, and had involuntarily
      deceived her....
    

      Here at the station, the smell of autumn was in the air, and the evening
      was cool.
    

      "It is time for me to go North," thought Gomov, as he left the platform.
      "It is time."
    

      III
    

      At home in Moscow, it was already like winter; the stoves were heated, and
      in the mornings, when the children were getting ready to go to school, and
      had their tea, it was dark and their nurse lighted the lamp for a short
      while. The frost had already begun. When the first snow falls, the first
      day of driving in sledges, it is good to see the white earth, the white
      roofs; one breathes easily, eagerly, and then one remembers the days of
      youth. The old lime-trees and birches, white with hoarfrost, have a kindly
      expression; they are nearer to the heart than cypresses and palm-trees,
      and with the dear familiar trees there is no need to think of mountains
      and the sea.
    

      Gomov was a native of Moscow. He returned to Moscow on a fine frosty day,
      and when he donned his fur coat and warm gloves, and took a stroll through
      Petrovka, and when on Saturday evening he heard the church-bells ringing,
      then his recent travels and the places he had visited lost all their
      charm. Little by little he sank back into Moscow life, read eagerly three
      newspapers a day, and said that he did not read Moscow papers as a matter
      of principle. He was drawn into a round of restaurants, clubs,
      dinner-parties, parties, and he was flattered to have his house frequented
      by famous lawyers and actors, and to play cards with a professor at the
      University club. He could eat a whole plateful of hot sielianka.
    

      So a month would pass, and Anna Sergueyevna, he thought, would be lost in
      the mists of memory and only rarely would she visit his dreams with her
      touching smile, just as other women had done. But more than a month
      passed, full winter came, and in his memory everything was clear, as
      though he had parted from Anna Sergueyevna only yesterday. And his memory
      was lit by a light that grew ever stronger. No matter how, through the
      voices of his children saying their lessons, penetrating to the evening
      stillness of his study, through hearing a song, or the music in a
      restaurant, or the snow-storm howling in the chimney, suddenly the whole
      thing would come to life again in his memory: the meeting on the jetty,
      the early morning with the mists on the mountains, the steamer from
      Feodossia and their kisses. He would pace up and down his room and
      remember it all and smile, and then his memories would drift into dreams,
      and the past was confused in his imagination with the future. He did not
      dream at night of Anna Sergueyevna, but she followed him everywhere, like
      a shadow, watching him. As he shut his eyes, he could see her, vividly,
      and she seemed handsomer, tenderer, younger than in reality; and he seemed
      to himself better than he had been at Talta. In the evenings she would
      look at him from the bookcase, from the fireplace, from the corner; he
      could hear her breathing and the soft rustle of her dress. In the street
      he would gaze at women's faces to see if there were not one like her....
    

      He was filled with a great longing to share his memories with some one.
      But at home it was impossible to speak of his love, and away from home—there
      was no one. Impossible to talk of her to the other people in the house and
      the men at the bank. And talk of what? Had he loved then? Was there
      anything fine, romantic, or elevating or even interesting in his relations
      with Anna Sergueyevna? And he would speak vaguely of love, of women, and
      nobody guessed what was the matter, and only his wife would raise her dark
      eyebrows and say:
    

      "Demitri, the rôle of coxcomb does not suit you at all."
    

      One night, as he was coming out of the club with his partner, an official,
      he could not help saying:
    

      "If only I could tell what a fascinating woman I met at Talta."
    

      The official seated himself in his sledge and drove off, but suddenly
      called:
    

      "Dimitri Dimitrich!"
    

      "Yes."
    

      "You were right. The sturgeon was tainted."
    

      These banal words suddenly roused Gomov's indignation. They seemed to him
      degrading and impure. What barbarous customs and people!
    

      What preposterous nights, what dull, empty days! Furious card-playing,
      gourmandising, drinking, endless conversations about the same things,
      futile activities and conversations taking up the best part of the day and
      all the best of a man's forces, leaving only a stunted, wingless life,
      just rubbish; and to go away and escape was impossible—one might as
      well be in a lunatic asylum or in prison with hard labour.
    

      Gomov did not sleep that night, but lay burning with indignation, and then
      all next day he had a headache. And the following night he slept badly,
      sitting up in bed and thinking, or pacing from corner to corner of his
      room. His children bored him, the bank bored him, and he had no desire to
      go out or to speak to any one.
    

      In December when the holidays came he prepared to go on a journey and told
      his wife he was going to Petersburg to present a petition for a young
      friend of his—and went to S. Why? He did not know. He wanted to see
      Anna Sergueyevna, to talk to her, and if possible to arrange an
      assignation.
    

      He arrived at S. in the morning and occupied the best room in the hotel,
      where the whole floor was covered with a grey canvas, and on the table
      there stood an inkstand grey with dust, adorned with a horseman on a
      headless horse holding a net in his raised hand. The porter gave him the
      necessary information: von Didenitz; Old Goucharno Street, his own house—not
      far from the hotel; lives well, has his own horses, every one knows him.
    

      Gomov walked slowly to Old Goucharno Street and found the house. In front
      of it was a long, grey fence spiked with nails.
    

      "No getting over a fence like that," thought Gomov, glancing from the
      windows to the fence.
    

      He thought: "To-day is a holiday and her husband is probably at home.
      Besides it would be tactless to call and upset her. If he sent a note then
      it might fall into her husband's hands and spoil everything. It would be
      better to wait for an opportunity." And he kept on walking up and down the
      street, and round the fence, waiting for his opportunity. He saw a beggar
      go in at the gate and the dogs attack him. He heard a piano and the sounds
      came faintly to his ears. It must be Anna Sergueyevna playing. The door
      suddenly opened and out of it came an old woman, and after her ran the
      familiar white Pomeranian. Gomov wanted to call the dog, but his heart
      suddenly began to thump and in his agitation he could not remember the
      dog's name.
    

      He walked on, and more and more he hated the grey fence and thought with a
      gust of irritation that Anna Sergueyevna had already forgotten him, and
      was perhaps already amusing herself with some one else, as would be only
      natural in a young woman forced from morning to night to behold the
      accursed fence. He returned to his room and sat for a long time on the
      sofa, not knowing what to do. Then he dined and afterward slept for a long
      while.
    

      "How idiotic and tiresome it all is," he thought as he awoke and saw the
      dark windows; for it was evening. "I've had sleep enough, and what shall I
      do to-night?"
    

      He sat on his bed which was covered with a cheap, grey blanket, exactly
      like those used in a hospital, and tormented himself.
    

      "So much for the lady with the toy dog.... So much for the great
      adventure.... Here you sit."
    

      However, in the morning, at the station, his eye had been caught by a
      poster with large letters: "First Performance of 'The Geisha.'" He
      remembered that and went to the theatre.
    

      "It is quite possible she will go to the first performance," he thought.
    

      The theatre was full and, as usual in all provincial theatres, there was a
      thick mist above the lights, the gallery was noisily restless; in the
      first row before the opening of the performance stood the local dandies
      with their hands behind their backs, and there in the governor's box, in
      front, sat the governor's daughter, and the governor himself sat modestly
      behind the curtain and only his hands were visible. The curtain quivered;
      the orchestra tuned up for a long time, and while the audience were coming
      in and taking their seats, Gomov gazed eagerly round.
    

      At last Anna Sergueyevna came in. She took her seat in the third row, and
      when Gomov glanced at her his heart ached and he knew that for him there
      was no one in the whole world nearer, dearer, and more important than she;
      she was lost in this provincial rabble, the little undistinguished woman,
      with a common lorgnette in her hands, yet she filled his whole life; she
      was his grief, his joy, his only happiness, and he longed for her; and
      through the noise of the bad orchestra with its tenth-rate fiddles, he
      thought how dear she was to him. He thought and dreamed.
    

      With Anna Sergueyevna there came in a young man with short side-whiskers,
      very tall, stooping; with every movement he shook and bowed continually.
      Probably he was the husband whom in a bitter mood at Talta she had called
      a lackey. And, indeed, in his long figure, his side-whiskers, the little
      bald patch on the top of his head, there was something of the lackey; he
      had a modest sugary smile and in his buttonhole he wore a University badge
      exactly like a lackey's number.
    

      In the first entr'acte the husband went out to smoke, and she was left
      alone. Gomov, who was also in the pit, came up to her and said in a
      trembling voice with a forced smile:
    

      "How do you do?"
    

      She looked up at him and went pale. Then she glanced at him again in
      terror, not believing her eyes, clasped her fan and lorgnette tightly
      together, apparently struggling to keep herself from fainting. Both were
      silent. She sat, he stood; frightened by her emotion, not daring to sit
      down beside her. The fiddles and flutes began to play and suddenly it
      seemed to them as though all the people in the boxes were looking at them.
      She got up and walked quickly to the exit; he followed, and both walked
      absently along the corridors, down the stairs, up the stairs, with the
      crowd shifting and shimmering before their eyes; all kinds of uniforms,
      judges, teachers, crown-estates, and all with badges; ladies shone and
      shimmered before them, like fur coats on moving rows of clothes-pegs, and
      there was a draught howling through the place laden with the smell of
      tobacco and cigar-ends. And Gomov, whose heart was thudding wildly,
      thought:
    

      "Oh, Lord! Why all these men and that beastly orchestra?"
    

      At that very moment he remembered how when he had seen Anna Sergueyevna
      off that evening at the station he had said to himself that everything was
      over between them, and they would never meet again. And now how far off
      they were from the end!
    

      On a narrow, dark staircase over which was written: "This Way to the
      Amphitheatre," she stopped:
    

      "How you frightened me!" she said, breathing heavily, still pale and
      apparently stupefied. "Oh! how you frightened me! I am nearly dead. Why
      did you come? Why?"
    

      "Understand me, Anna," he whispered quickly. "I implore you to
      understand...."
    

      She looked at him fearfully, in entreaty, with love in her eyes, gazing
      fixedly to gather up in her memory every one of his features.
    

      "I suffer so!" she went on, not listening to him. "All the time, I thought
      only of you. I lived with thoughts of you.... And I wanted to forget, to
      forget, but why, why did you come?"
    

      A little above them, on the landing, two schoolboys stood and smoked and
      looked down at them, but Gomov did not care. He drew her to him and began
      to kiss her cheeks, her hands.
    

      "What are you doing? What are you doing?" she said in terror, thrusting
      him away.... "We were both mad. Go away to-night. You must go away at
      once.... I implore you, by everything you hold sacred, I implore you....
      The people are coming——-"
    

      Some one passed them on the stairs.
    

      "You must go away," Anna Sergueyevna went on in a whisper. "Do you hear,
      Dimitri Dimitrich? I'll come to you in Moscow. I never was happy. Now I am
      unhappy and I shall never, never be happy, never! Don't make me suffer
      even more! I swear, I'll come to Moscow. And now let us part. My dear,
      dearest darling, let us part!"
    

      She pressed his hand and began to go quickly down-stairs, all the while
      looking back at him, and in her eyes plainly showed that she was most
      unhappy. Gomov stood for a while, listened, then, when all was quiet he
      found his coat and left the theatre.
    

      IV
    

      And Anna Sergueyevna began to come to him in Moscow. Once every two or
      three months she would leave S., telling her husband that she was going to
      consult a specialist in women's diseases. Her husband half believed and
      half disbelieved her. At Moscow she would stay at the "Slaviansky Bazaar"
      and send a message at once to Gomov. He would come to her, and nobody in
      Moscow knew.
    

      Once as he was going to her as usual one winter morning—he had not
      received her message the night before—he had his daughter with him,
      for he was taking her to school which was on the way. Great wet flakes of
      snow were falling.
    

      "Three degrees above freezing," he said, "and still the snow is falling.
      But the warmth is only on the surface of the earth. In the upper strata of
      the atmosphere there is quite a different temperature."
    

      "Yes, papa. Why is there no thunder in winter?"
    

      He explained this too, and as he spoke he thought of his assignation, and
      that not a living soul knew of it, or ever would know. He had two lives;
      one obvious, which every one could see and know, if they were sufficiently
      interested, a life full of conventional truth and conventional fraud,
      exactly like the lives of his friends and acquaintances; and another,
      which moved underground. And by a strange conspiracy of circumstances,
      everything that was to him important, interesting, vital, everything that
      enabled him to be sincere and denied self-deception and was the very core
      of his being, must dwell hidden away from others, and everything that made
      him false, a mere shape in which he hid himself in order to conceal the
      truth, as for instance his work in the bank, arguments at the club, his
      favourite gibe about women, going to parties with his wife—all this
      was open. And, judging others by himself, he did not believe the things he
      saw, and assumed that everybody else also had his real vital life passing
      under a veil of mystery as under the cover of the night. Every man's
      intimate existence is kept mysterious, and perhaps, in part, because of
      that civilised people are so nervously anxious that a personal secret
      should be respected.
    

      When he had left his daughter at school, Gomov went to the "Slaviansky
      Bazaar." He took off his fur coat down-stairs, went up and knocked quietly
      at the door. Anna Sergueyevna, wearing his favourite grey dress, tired by
      the journey, had been expecting him to come all night. She was pale, and
      looked at him without a smile, and flung herself on his breast as soon as
      he entered. Their kiss was long and lingering as though they had not seen
      each other for a couple of years.
    

      "Well, how are you getting on down there?" he asked. "What is your news?"
    

      "Wait. I'll tell you presently.... I cannot."
    

      She could not speak, for she was weeping. She turned her face from him and
      dried her eyes.
    

      "Well, let her cry a bit.... I'll wait," he thought, and sat down.
    

      Then he rang and ordered tea, and then, as he drank it, she stood and
      gazed out of the window.... She was weeping in distress, in the bitter
      knowledge that their life had fallen out so sadly; only seeing each other
      in secret, hiding themselves away like thieves! Was not their life
      crushed?
    

      "Don't cry.... Don't cry," he said.
    

      It was clear to him that their love was yet far from its end, which there
      was no seeing. Anna Sergueyevna was more and more passionately attached to
      him; she adored him and it was inconceivable that he should tell her that
      their love must some day end; she would not believe it.
    

      He came up to her and patted her shoulder fondly and at that moment he saw
      himself in the mirror.
    

      His hair was already going grey. And it seemed strange to him that in the
      last few years he should have got so old and ugly. Her shoulders were warm
      and trembled to his touch. He was suddenly filled with pity for her life,
      still so warm and beautiful, but probably beginning to fade and wither,
      like his own. Why should she love him so much? He always seemed to women
      not what he really was, and they loved in him, not himself, but the
      creature of their imagination, the thing they hankered for in life, and
      when they had discovered their mistake, still they loved him. And not one
      of them was happy with him. Time passed; he met women and was friends with
      them, went further and parted, but never once did he love; there was
      everything but love.
    

      And now at last when his hair was grey he had fallen in love, real love—for
      the first time in his life.
    

      Anna Sergueyevna and he loved one another, like dear kindred, like husband
      and wife, like devoted friends; it seemed to them that Fate had destined
      them for one another, and it was inconceivable that he should have a wife,
      she a husband; they were like two birds of passage, a male and a female,
      which had been caught and forced to live in separate cages. They had
      forgiven each other all the past of which they were ashamed; they forgave
      everything in the present, and they felt that their love had changed both
      of them.
    

      Formerly, when he felt a melancholy compunction, he used to comfort
      himself with all kinds of arguments, just as they happened to cross his
      mind, but now he was far removed from any such ideas; he was filled with a
      profound pity, and he desired to be tender and sincere....
    

      "Don't cry, my darling," he said. "You have cried enough.... Now let us
      talk and see if we can't find some way out."
    

      Then they talked it all over, and tried to discover some means of avoiding
      the necessity for concealment and deception, and the torment of living in
      different towns, and of not seeing each other for a long time. How could
      they shake off these intolerable fetters?
    

      "How? How?" he asked, holding his head in his hands. "How?"
    

      And it seemed that but a little while and the solution would be found and
      there would begin a lovely new life; and to both of them it was clear that
      the end was still very far off, and that their hardest and most difficult
      period was only just beginning.
    

GOUSSIEV
    

IT was already dark and would soon be night.
    

      Goussiev, a private on long leave, raised himself a little in his hammock
      and said in a whisper:
    

      "Can you hear me, Pavel Ivanich? A soldier at Souchan told me that their
      boat ran into an enormous fish and knocked a hole in her bottom."
    

      The man of condition unknown whom he addressed, and whom everybody in the
      hospital-ship called Pavel Ivanich, was silent, as if he had not heard.
    

      And once more there was silence.... The wind whistled through the rigging,
      the screw buzzed, the waves came washing, the hammocks squeaked, but to
      all these sounds their ears were long since accustomed and it seemed as
      though everything were wrapped in sleep and silence. It was very
      oppressive. The three patients—two soldiers and a sailor—who
      had played cards all day were now asleep and tossing to and fro.
    

      The vessel began to shake. The hammock under Goussiev slowly heaved up and
      down, as though it were breathing—one, two, three.... Something
      crashed on the floor and began to tinkle: the jug must have fallen down.
    

      "The wind has broken loose...." said Goussiev, listening attentively.
    

      This time Pavel Ivanich coughed and answered irritably:
    

      "You spoke just now of a ship colliding with a large fish, and now you
      talk of the wind breaking loose.... Is the wind a dog to break loose?"
    

      "That's what people say."
    

      "Then people are as ignorant as you.... But what do they not say? You
      should keep a head on your shoulders and think. Silly idiot!"
    

      Pavel Ivanich was subject to seasickness. When the ship rolled he would
      get very cross, and the least trifle would upset him, though Goussiev
      could never see anything to be cross about. What was there unusual in his
      story about the fish or in his saying that the wind had broken loose?
      Suppose the fish were as big as a mountain and its back were as hard as a
      sturgeon's, and suppose that at the end of the wood there were huge stone
      walls with the snarling winds chained up to them.... If they do not break
      loose, why then do they rage over the sea as though they were possessed,
      and rush about like dogs? If they are not chained, what happens to them
      when it is calm?
    

      Goussiev thought for a long time of a fish as big as a mountain, and of
      thick rusty chains; then he got tired of that and began to think of his
      native place whither he was returning after five years' service in the Far
      East. He saw with his mind's eye the great pond covered with snow.... On
      one side of the pond was a brick-built pottery, with a tall chimney
      belching clouds of black smoke, and on the other side was the village....
      From the yard of the fifth house from the corner came his brother Alency
      in a sledge; behind him sat his little son Vanka in large felt boots, and
      his daughter Akulka, also in felt boots. Alency is tipsy, Vanka laughs,
      and Akulka's face is hidden—she is well wrapped up.
    

      "The children will catch cold ..." thought Goussiev. "God grant them," he
      whispered, "a pure right mind that they may honour their parents and be
      better than their father and mother...."
    

      "The boots want soling," cried the sick sailor in a deep voice. "Aye,
      aye."
    

      The thread of Goussiev's thoughts was broken, and instead of the pond,
      suddenly—without rhyme or reason—he saw a large bull's head
      without eyes, and the horse and sledge did not move on, but went round and
      round in a black mist. But still he was glad he had seen his dear ones. He
      gasped for joy, and his limbs tingled and his fingers throbbed.
    

      "God suffered me to see them!" he muttered, and opened his eyes and looked
      round in the darkness for water.
    

      He drank, then lay down again, and once more the sledge skimmed along, and
      he saw the bull's head without eyes, black smoke, clouds of it. And so on
      till dawn.
    

      II
    

      At first through the darkness there appeared only a blue circle, the
      port-hole, then Goussiev began slowly to distinguish the man in the next
      hammock, Pavel Ivanich. He was sleeping in a sitting position, for if he
      lay down he could not breathe. His face was grey; his nose long and sharp,
      and his eyes were huge, because he was so thin; his temples were sunk, his
      beard scanty, the hair on his head long.... By his face it was impossible
      to tell his class: gentleman, merchant, or peasant; judging by his
      appearance and long hair he looked almost like a recluse, a lay-brother,
      but when he spoke—he was not at all like a monk. He was losing
      strength through his cough and his illness and the suffocating heat, and
      he breathed heavily and was always moving his dry lips. Noticing that
      Goussiev was looking at him, he turned toward him and said:
    

      "I'm beginning to understand.... Yes.... Now I understand."
    

      "What do you understand, Pavel Ivanich?"
    

      "Yes.... It was strange to me at first, why you sick men, instead of being
      kept quiet, should be on this steamer, where the heat is stifling, and
      stinking, and pitching and tossing, and must be fatal to you; but now it
      is all clear to me.... Yes. The doctors sent you to the steamer to get rid
      of you. They got tired of all the trouble you gave them, brutes like you.
    

      ...You don't pay them; you only give a lot of trouble, and if you die you
      spoil their reports. Therefore you are just cattle, and there is no
      difficulty in getting rid of you.... They only need to lack conscience and
      humanity, and to deceive the owners of the steamer. We needn't worry about
      the first, they are experts by nature; but the second needs a certain
      amount of practice. In a crowd of four hundred healthy soldiers and
      sailors—five sick men are never noticed; so you were carried up to
      the steamer, mixed with a healthy lot who were counted in such a hurry
      that nothing wrong was noticed, and when the steamer got away they saw
      fever-stricken and consumptive men lying helpless on the deck...."
    

      Goussiev could not make out what Pavel Ivanich was talking about; thinking
      he was being taken to task, he said by way of excusing himself:
    

      "I lay on the deck because when we were taken off the barge I caught a
      chill."
    

      "Shocking!" said Pavel Ivanich. "They know quite well that you can't last
      out the voyage, and yet they send you here! You may get as far as the
      Indian Ocean, but what then? It is awful to think of.... And that's all
      the return you get for faithful unblemished service!"
    

      Pavel Ivanich looked very angry, and smote his forehead and gasped:
    

      "They ought to be shown up in the papers. There would be an awful row."
    

      The two sick soldiers and the sailor were already up and had begun to play
      cards, the sailor propped up in his hammock, and the soldiers squatting
      uncomfortably on the floor. One soldier had his right arm in a sling and
      his wrist was tightly bandaged so that he had to hold the cards in his
      left hand or in the crook of his elbow. The boat was rolling violently so
      that it was impossible to get up or to drink tea or to take medicine.
    

      "You were an orderly?" Pavel Ivanich asked Goussiev.
    

      "That's it. An orderly."
    

      "My God, my God!" said Pavel Ivanich sorrowfully. "To take a man from his
      native place, drag him fifteen thousand miles, drive him into consumption
      ... and what for? I ask you. To make him an orderly to some Captain
      Farthing or Midshipman Hole! Where's the sense of it?"
    

      "It's not a bad job, Pavel Ivanich. You get up in the morning, clean the
      boots, boil the samovar, tidy up the room, and then there is nothing to
      do. The lieutenant draws plans all day long, and you can pray to God if
      you like—or read books—or go out into the streets. It's a good
      enough life."
    

      "Yes. Very good! The lieutenant draws plans, and you stay in the kitchen
      all day long and suffer from homesickness.... Plans.... Plans don't
      matter. It's human life that matters! Life doesn't come again. One should
      be sparing of it."
    

      "Certainly Pavel Ivanich. A bad man meets no quarter, either at home, or
      in the army, but if you live straight, and do as you are told, then no one
      will harm you. They are educated and they understand.... For five years
      now I've never been in the cells and I've only been thrashed once—touch
      wood!"
    

      "What was that for?"
    

      "Fighting. I have a heavy fist, Pavel Ivanich. Four Chinamen came into our
      yard: they were carrying wood, I think, but I don't remember. Well, I was
      bored. I went for them and one of them got a bloody nose. The lieutenant
      saw it through the window and gave me a thick ear."
    

      "You poor fool," muttered Pavel Ivanich. "You don't understand anything."
    

      He was completely exhausted with the tossing of the boat and shut his
      eyes; his head fell back and then flopped forward onto his chest. He tried
      several times to lie down, but in vain, for he could not breathe.
    

      "And why did you go for the four Chinamen?" he asked after a while.
    

      "For no reason. They came into the yard and I went for them."
    

      Silence fell.... The gamblers played for a couple of hours, absorbed and
      cursing, but the tossing of the ship tired even them; they threw the cards
      away and laid down. Once more Goussiev thought of the big pond, the
      pottery, the village. Once more the sledges skimmed along, once more Vanka
      laughed, and that fool of an Akulka opened her fur coat, and stretched out
      her feet; look, she seemed to say, look, poor people, my felt boots are
      new and not like Vanka's.
    

      "She's getting on for six and still she has no sense!" said Goussiev.
      "Instead of showing your boots off, why don't you bring some water to your
      soldier-uncle? I'll give you a present."
    

      Then came Andrea, with his firelock on his shoulder, carrying a hare he
      had shot, and he was followed by Tsaichik the cripple, who offered him a
      piece of soap for the hare; and there was the black heifer in the yard,
      and Domna sewing a shirt and crying over something, and there was the
      eyeless bull's head and the black smoke....
    

      Overhead there was shouting, sailors running; the sound of something heavy
      being dragged along the deck, or something had broken.... More running.
      Something wrong? Goussiev raised his head, listened and saw the two
      soldiers and the sailor playing cards again; Pavel Ivanich sitting up and
      moving his lips. It was very close, he could hardly breathe, he wanted a
      drink, but the water was warm and disgusting.... The pitching of the boat
      was now better.
    

      Suddenly something queer happened to one of the soldiers.... He called ace
      of diamonds, lost his reckoning and dropped his cards. He started and
      laughed stupidly and looked round.
    

      "In a moment, you fellows," he said and lay down on the floor.
    

      All were at a loss. They shouted at him but he made no reply.
    

      "Stiepan, are you ill?" asked the other soldier with the bandaged hand.
      "Perhaps we'd better call the priest, eh?"
    

      "Stiepan, drink some water," said the sailor. "Here, mate, have a drink."
    

      "What's the good of breaking his teeth with the jug," shouted Goussiev
      angrily. "Don't you see, you fatheads?"
    

      "What."
    

      "What!" cried Goussiev. "He's snuffed it, dead. That's what! Good God,
      what fools!..."
    

      III
    

      The rolling stopped and Pavel Ivanich cheered up. He was no longer
      peevish. His face had an arrogant, impetuous, and mocking expression. He
      looked as if he were on the point of saying: "I'll tell you a story that
      will make you die of laughter." Their port-hole was open and a soft wind
      blew in on Pavel Ivanich. Voices could be heard and the splash of oars in
      the water.... Beneath the window some one was howling in a thin, horrible
      voice; probably a Chinaman singing.
    

      "Yes. We are in harbour," said Pavel Ivanich, smiling mockingly. "Another
      month and we shall be in Russia. It's true; my gallant warriors, I shall
      get to Odessa and thence I shall go straight to Kharkhov. At Kharkhov I
      have a friend, a literary man. I shall go to him and I shall say, 'now, my
      friend, give up your rotten little love-stories and descriptions of
      nature, and expose the vileness of the human biped.... There's a subject
      for you.'"
    

      He thought for a moment and then he said:
    

      "Goussiev, do you know how I swindled them?"
    

      "Who, Pavel Ivanich?"
    

      "The lot out there.... You see there's only first and third class on the
      steamer, and only peasants are allowed to go third. If you have a decent
      suit, and look like a nobleman or a bourgeois, at a distance, then you
      must go first. It may break you, but you have to lay down your five
      hundred roubles. 'What's the point of such an arrangement?' I asked. 'Is
      it meant to raise the prestige of Russian intellectuals?' 'Not a bit,'
      said they. 'We don't let you go, simply because it is impossible for a
      decent man to go third. It is so vile and disgusting.' 'Yes,' said I.
      'Thanks for taking so much trouble about decent people. Anyhow, bad or no,
      I haven't got five hundred roubles as I have neither robbed the treasury
      nor exploited foreigners, nor dealt in contraband, nor flogged any one to
      death, and, therefore, I think I have a right to go first-class and to
      take rank with the intelligentsia of Russia.' But there's no convincing
      them by logic.... I had to try fraud. I put on a peasant's coat and long
      boots, and a drunken, stupid expression and went to the agent and said:
      'Give me a ticket, your Honour.'
    

      "'What's your position?' says the agent.
    

      "'Clerical,' said I. 'My father was an honest priest. He always told the
      truth to the great ones of the earth, and so he suffered much.'"
    

      Pavel Ivanich got tired with talking, and his breath failed him, but he
      went on:
    

      "Yes. I always tell the truth straight out.... I am afraid of nobody and
      nothing. There's a great difference between myself and you in that
      respect. You are dull, blind, stupid, you see nothing, and you don't
      understand what you do see. You are told that the wind breaks its chain,
      that you are brutes and worse, and you believe; you are thrashed and you
      kiss the hand that thrashes you; a swine in a raccoon pelisse robs you,
      and throws you sixpence for tea, and you say: 'Please, your Honour, let me
      kiss your hand.' You are pariahs, skunks.... I am different. I live
      consciously. I see everything, as an eagle or a hawk sees when it hovers
      over the earth, and I understand everything. I am a living protest. I see
      injustice—I protest; I see bigotry and hypocrisy—I protest; I
      see swine triumphant—I protest, and I am unconquerable. No Spanish
      inquisition can make me hold my tongue. Aye.... Cut my tongue out. I'll
      protest by gesture.... Shut me up in a dungeon—I'll shout so loud
      that I shall be heard for a mile round, or I'll starve myself, so that
      there shall be a still heavier weight on their black consciences. Kill me—and
      my ghost will return. All my acquaintances tell me: 'You are a most
      insufferable man, Pavel Ivanich!' I am proud of such a reputation. I
      served three years in the Far East, and have got bitter memories enough
      for a hundred years. I inveighed against it all. My friends write from
      Russia: 'Do not come.' But I'm going, to spite them.... Yes.... That is
      life. I understand. You can call that life."
    

      Goussiev was not listening, but lay looking out of the port-hole; on the
      transparent lovely turquoise water swung a boat all shining in the
      shimmering light; a fat Chinaman was sitting in it eating rice with
      chop-sticks. The water murmured softly, and over it lazily soared white
      sea-gulls.
    

      "It would be fun to give that fat fellow one on the back of his neck...."
      thought Goussiev, watching the fat Chinaman and yawning.
    

      He dozed, and it seemed to him that all the world was slumbering. Time
      slipped swiftly away. The day passed imperceptibly; imperceptibly the
      twilight fell.... The steamer was still no longer but was moving on.
    

      IV
    

      Two days passed. Pavel Ivanich no longer sat up, but lay full length; his
      eyes were closed and his nose seemed to be sharper than ever.
    

      "Pavel Ivanich!" called Goussiev, "Pavel Ivanich."
    

      Pavel Ivanich opened his eyes and moved his lips.
    

      "Aren't you well?"
    

      "It's nothing," answered Pavel Ivanich, breathing heavily. "It's nothing.
      No. I'm much better. You see I can lie down now. I'm much better."
    

      "Thank God for it, Pavel Ivanich."
    

      "When I compare myself with you, I am sorry for you ... poor devils. My
      lungs are all right; my cough comes from indigestion ... I can endure this
      hell, not to mention the Red Sea! Besides, I have a critical attitude
      toward my illness, as well as to my medicine. But you ... you are
      ignorant.... It's hard lines on you, very hard."
    

      The ship was running smoothly; it was calm but still stifling and hot as a
      Turkish bath; it was hard not only to speak but even to listen without an
      effort. Goussiev clasped his knees, leaned his head on them and thought of
      his native place. My God, in such heat it was a pleasure to think of snow
      and cold! He saw himself driving on a sledge, and suddenly the horses were
      frightened and bolted.... Heedless of roads, dikes, ditches they rushed
      like mad through the village, across the pond, past the works, through the
      fields.... "Hold them in!" cried the women and the passers-by. "Hold them
      in!" But why hold them in? Let the cold wind slap your face and cut your
      hands; let the lumps of snow thrown up by the horses' hoofs fall on your
      hat, down your neck and chest; let the runners of the sledge be buckled,
      and the traces and harness be torn and be damned to it! What fun when the
      sledge topples over and you are flung hard into a snow-drift; with your
      face slap into the snow, and you get up all white with your moustaches
      covered with icicles, hatless, gloveless, with your belt undone.... People
      laugh and dogs bark....
    

      Pavel Ivanich, with one eye half open looked at Goussiev and asked
      quietly:
    

      "Goussiev, did your commander steal?"
    

      "How do I know, Pavel Ivanich? The likes of us don't hear of it."
    

      A long time passed in silence. Goussiev thought, dreamed, drank water; it
      was difficult to speak, difficult to hear, and he was afraid of being
      spoken to. One hour passed, a second, a third; evening came, then night;
      but he noticed nothing as he sat dreaming of the snow.
    

      He could hear some one coming into the ward; voices, but five minutes
      passed and all was still.
    

      "God rest his soul!" said the soldier with the bandaged hand. "He was a
      restless man."
    

      "What?" asked Goussiev. "Who?"
    

      "He's dead. He has just been taken up-stairs."
    

      "Oh, well," muttered Goussiev with a yawn. "God rest his soul."
    

      "What do you think, Goussiev?" asked the bandaged soldier after some time.
      "Will he go to heaven?"
    

      "Who?"
    

      "Pavel Ivanich."
    

      "He will. He suffered much. Besides, he was a priest's son, and priests
      have many relations. They will pray for his soul."
    

      The bandaged soldier sat down on Goussiev's hammock and said in an
      undertone:
    

      "You won't live much longer, Goussiev. You'll never see Russia."
    

      "Did the doctor or the nurse tell you that?" asked Goussiev.
    

      "No one told me, but I can see it. You can always tell when a man is going
      to die soon. You neither eat nor drink, and you have gone very thin and
      awful to look at. Consumption. That's what it is. I'm not saying this to
      make you uneasy, but because I thought you might like to have the last
      sacrament. And if you have any money, you had better give it to the senior
      officer."
    

      "I have not written home," said Goussiev. "I shall die and they will never
      know."
    

      "They will know," said the sailor in his deep voice. "When you die they
      will put you down in the log, and at Odessa they will give a note to the
      military governor, and he will send it to your parish or wherever it
      is...."
    

      This conversation made Goussiev begin to feel unhappy and a vague desire
      began to take possession of him. He drank water—it was not that; he
      stretched out to the port-hole and breathed the hot, moist air—it
      was not that; he tried to think of his native place and the snow—it
      was not that.... At last he felt that he would choke if he stayed a moment
      longer in the hospital.
    

      "I feel poorly, mates," he said. "I want to go on deck. For Christ's sake
      take me on deck."
    

      Goussiev flung his arms round the soldier's neck and the soldier held him
      with his free arm and supported him up the gangway. On deck there were
      rows and rows of sleeping soldiers and sailors; so many of them that it
      was difficult to pick a way through them.
    

      "Stand up," said the bandaged soldier gently. "Walk after me slowly and
      hold on to my shirt...."
    

      It was dark. There was no light on deck or on the masts or over the sea.
      In the bows a sentry stood motionless as a statue, but he looked as if he
      were asleep. It was as though the steamer had been left to its own sweet
      will, to go where it liked.
    

      "They are going to throw Pavel Ivanich into the sea," said the bandaged
      soldier. "They will put him in a sack and throw him overboard."
    

      "Yes. That's the way they do."
    

      "But it's better to lie at home in the earth. Then the mother can go to
      the grave and weep over it."
    

      "Surely."
    

      There was a smell of dung and hay. With heads hanging there were oxen
      standing by the bulwark—one, two, three ... eight beasts. And there
      was a little horse. Goussiev put out his hand to pat it, but it shook its
      head, showed its teeth and tried to bite his sleeve.
    

      "Damn you," said Goussiev angrily.
    

      He and the soldier slowly made their way to the bows and stood against the
      bulwark and looked silently up and down. Above them was the wide sky,
      bright with stars, peace and tranquillity—exactly as it was at home
      in his village; but below—darkness and turbulence. Mysterious
      towering waves. Each wave seemed to strive to rise higher than the rest;
      and they pressed and jostled each other and yet others came, fierce and
      ugly, and hurled themselves into the fray.
    

      There is neither sense nor pity in the sea. Had the steamer been smaller,
      and not made of tough iron, the waves would have crushed it remorselessly
      and all the men in it, without distinction of good and bad. The steamer
      too seemed cruel and senseless. The large-nosed monster pressed forward
      and cut its way through millions of waves; it was afraid neither of
      darkness, nor of the wind, nor of space, nor of loneliness; it cared for
      nothing, and if the ocean had its people, the monster would crush them
      without distinction of good and bad.
    

      "Where are we now?" asked Goussiev.
    

      "I don't know. Must be the ocean."
    

      "There's no land in sight."
    

      "Why, they say we shan't see land for another seven days."
    

      The two soldiers looked at the white foam gleaming with phosphorescence.
      Goussiev was the first to break the silence.
    

      "Nothing is really horrible," he said. "You feel uneasy, as if you were in
      a dark forest. Suppose a boat were lowered and I was ordered to go a
      hundred miles out to sea to fish—I would go. Or suppose I saw a soul
      fall into the water—I would go in after him. I wouldn't go in for a
      German or a Chinaman, but I'd try to save a Russian."
    

      "Aren't you afraid to die?"
    

      "Yes. I'm afraid. I'm sorry for the people at home. I have a brother at
      home, you know, and he is not steady; he drinks, beats his wife for
      nothing at all, and my old father and mother may be brought to ruin. But
      my legs are giving way, mate, and it is hot here.... Let me go to bed."
    

      V
    

      Goussiev went back to the ward and lay down in his hammock. As before, a
      vague desire tormented him and he could not make out what it was. There
      was a congestion in his chest; a noise in his head, and his mouth was so
      dry that he could hardly move his tongue. He dozed and dreamed, and,
      exhausted by the heat, his cough and the nightmares that haunted him,
      toward morning he fell into a deep sleep. He dreamed he was in barracks,
      and the bread had just been taken out of the oven, and he crawled into the
      oven and lathered himself with a birch broom. He slept for two days and on
      the third day in the afternoon two sailors came down and carried him out
      of the ward.
    

      He was sewn up in sail-cloth, and to make him heavier two iron bars were
      sewn up with him. In the sail-cloth he looked like a carrot or a radish,
      broad at the top, narrow at the bottom.... Just before sunset he was taken
      on deck and laid on a board one end of which lay on the bulwark, the other
      on a box, raised up by a stool. Round him stood the invalided soldiers.
    

      "Blessed is our God," began the priest; "always, now and for ever and
      ever."
    

      "Amen!" said three sailors.
    

      The soldiers and the crew crossed themselves and looked askance at the
      waves. It was strange that a man should be sewn up in sail-cloth and
      dropped into the sea. Could it happen to any one?
    

      The priest sprinkled Goussiev with earth and bowed. A hymn was sung.
    

      The guard lifted up the end of the board, Goussiev slipped down it; shot
      headlong, turned over in the air, then plop! The foam covered him, for a
      moment it looked as though he was swathed in lace, but the moment passed—and
      he disappeared beneath the waves.
    

      He dropped down to the bottom. Would he reach it? The bottom is miles
      down, they say. He dropped down almost sixty or seventy feet, then began
      to go slower and slower, swung to and fro as though he were thinking;
      then, borne along by the current; he moved more sideways than downward.
    

      But soon he met a shoal of pilot-fish. Seeing a dark body, the fish
      stopped dead and sudden, all together, turned and went back. Less than a
      minute later, like arrows they darted at Goussiev, zigzagging through the
      water around him....
    

      Later came another dark body, a shark. Gravely and leisurely, as though it
      had not noticed Goussiev, it swam up under him, and he rolled over on its
      back; it turned its belly up, taking its ease in the warm, translucent
      water, and slowly opened its mouth with its two rows of teeth. The
      pilot-fish were wildly excited; they stopped to see what was going to
      happen. The shark played with the body, then slowly opened its mouth under
      it, touched it with its teeth, and the sail-cloth was ripped open from
      head to foot; one of the bars fell out, frightening the pilot-fish and
      striking the shark on its side, and sank to the bottom.
    

      And above the surface, the clouds were huddling up about the setting sun;
      one cloud was like a triumphal arch, another like a lion, another like a
      pair of scissors.... From behind the clouds came a broad green ray
      reaching up to the very middle of the sky; a little later a violet ray was
      flung alongside this, and then others gold and pink.... The sky was soft
      and lilac, pale and tender. At first beneath the lovely, glorious sky the
      ocean frowned, but soon the ocean also took on colour—sweet, joyful,
      passionate colours, almost impossible to name in human language.
    

MY LIFE
    

      THE STORY OF A PROVINCIAL
    

THE director said to me: "I only keep you out of
      respect for your worthy father, or you would have gone long since." I
      replied: "You flatter me, your Excellency, but I suppose I am in a
      position to go." And then I heard him saying: "Take the fellow away, he is
      getting on my nerves."
    

      Two days later I was dismissed. Ever since I had been grown up, to the
      great sorrow of my father, the municipal architect, I had changed my
      position nine times, going from one department to another, but all the
      departments were as like each other as drops of water; I had to sit and
      write, listen to inane and rude remarks, and just wait until I was
      dismissed.
    

      When I told my father, he was sitting back in his chair with his eyes
      shut. His thin, dry face, with a dove-coloured tinge where he shaved (his
      face was like that of an old Catholic organist), wore an expression of
      meek submission. Without answering my greeting or opening his eyes, he
      said:
    

      "If my dear wife, your mother, were alive, your life would be a constant
      grief to her. I can see the hand of Providence in her untimely death. Tell
      me, you unhappy boy," he went on, opening his eyes, "what am I to do with
      you?"
    

      When I was younger my relations and friends knew what to do with me; some
      advised me to go into the army as a volunteer, others were for pharmacy,
      others for the telegraph service; but now that I was twenty-four and was
      going grey at the temples and had already tried the army and pharmacy and
      the telegraph service, and every possibility seemed to be exhausted, they
      gave me no more advice, but only sighed and shook their heads.
    

      "What do you think of yourself?" my father went on. "At your age other
      young men have a good social position, and just look at yourself: a lazy
      lout, a beggar, living on your father!"
    

      And, as usual, he went on to say that young men were going to the dogs
      through want of faith, materialism, and conceit, and that amateur
      theatricals should be prohibited because they seduce young people from
      religion and their duty.
    

      "To-morrow we will go together, and you shall apologise to the director
      and promise to do your work conscientiously," he concluded. "You must not
      be without a position in society for a single day."
    

      "Please listen to me," said I firmly, though I did not anticipate gaining
      anything by speaking. "What you call a position in society is the
      privilege of capital and education. But people who are poor and uneducated
      have to earn their living by hard physical labour, and I see no reason why
      I should be an exception."
    

      "It is foolish and trivial of you to talk of physical labour," said my
      father with some irritation. "Do try to understand, you idiot, and get it
      into your brainless head, that in addition to physical strength you have a
      divine spirit; a sacred fire, by which you are distinguished from an ass
      or a reptile and bringing you nigh to God. This sacred fire has been kept
      alight for thousands of years by the best of mankind. Your
      great-grandfather, General Pologniev, fought at Borodino; your grandfather
      was a poet, an orator, and a marshal of the nobility; your uncle was an
      educationalist; and I, your father, am an architect! Have all the
      Polognievs kept the sacred fire alight for you to put it out?"
    

      "There must be justice," said I. "Millions of people have to do manual
      labour."
    

      "Let them. They can do nothing else! Even a fool or a criminal can do
      manual labour. It is the mark of a slave and a barbarian, whereas the
      sacred fire is given only to a few!"
    

      It was useless to go on with the conversation. My father worshipped
      himself and would not be convinced by anything unless he said it himself.
      Besides, I knew quite well that the annoyance with which he spoke of
      unskilled labour came not so much from any regard for the sacred fire, as
      from a secret fear that I should become a working man and the talk of the
      town. But the chief thing was that all my schoolfellows had long ago gone
      through the University and were making careers for themselves, and the son
      of the director of the State Bank was already a collegiate assessor, while
      I, an only son, was nothing! It was useless and unpleasant to go on with
      the conversation, but I still sat there and raised objections in the hope
      of making myself understood. The problem was simple and clear: how was I
      to earn my living? But he could not see its simplicity and kept on talking
      with sugary rounded phrases about Borodino and the sacred fire, and my
      uncle, and the forgotten poet who wrote bad, insincere verses, and he
      called me a brainless fool. But how I longed to be understood! In spite of
      everything, I loved my father and my sister, and from boyhood I have had a
      habit of considering them, so strongly rooted that I shall probably never
      get rid of it; whether I am right or wrong I am always afraid of hurting
      them, and go in terror lest my father's thin neck should go red with anger
      and he should have an apoplectic fit.
    

      "It is shameful and degrading for a man of my age to sit in a stuffy room
      and compete with a typewriting-machine," I said. "What has that to do with
      the sacred fire?"
    

      "Still, it is intellectual work," said my father. "But that's enough. Let
      us drop the conversation and I warn you that if you refuse to return to
      your office and indulge your contemptible inclinations, then you will lose
      my love and your sister's. I shall cut you out of my will—that I
      swear, by God!"
    

      With perfect sincerity, in order to show the purity of my motives, by
      which I hope to be guided all through my life, I said:
    

      "The matter of inheritance does not strike me as important. I renounce any
      rights I may have."
    

      For some unexpected reason these words greatly offended my father. He went
      purple in the face.
    

      "How dare you talk to me like that, you fool!" he cried to me in a thin,
      shrill voice. "You scoundrel!" And he struck me quickly and dexterously
      with a familiar movement; once—twice. "You forget yourself!"
    

      When I was a boy and my father struck me, I used to stand bolt upright
      like a soldier and look him straight in the face; and, exactly as if I
      were still a boy, I stood erect, and tried to look into his eyes. My
      father was old and very thin, but his spare muscles must have been as
      strong as whip-cord, for he hit very hard.
    

      I returned to the hall, but there he seized his umbrella and struck me
      several times over the head and shoulders; at that moment my sister opened
      the drawing-room door to see what the noise was, but immediately drew back
      with an expression of pity and horror, and said not one word in my
      defence.
    

      My intention not to return to the office, but to start a new working life,
      was unshakable. It only remained to choose the kind of work—and
      there seemed to be no great difficulty about that, because I was strong,
      patient, and willing. I was prepared to face a monotonous, laborious life,
      of semi-starvation, filth, and rough surroundings, always overshadowed
      with the thought of finding a job and a living. And—who knows—returning
      from work in the Great Gentry Street, I might often envy Dolyhikov, the
      engineer, who lives by intellectual work, but I was happy in thinking of
      my coming troubles. I used to dream of intellectual activity, and to
      imagine myself a teacher, a doctor, a writer, but my dreams remained only
      dreams. A liking for intellectual pleasures—like the theatre and
      reading—grew into a passion with me, but I did not know whether I
      had any capacity for intellectual work. At school I had an unconquerable
      aversion for the Greek language, so that I had to leave when I was in the
      fourth class. Teachers were got to coach me up for the fifth class, and
      then I went into various departments, spending most of my time in perfect
      idleness, and this, I was told, was intellectual work.
    

      My activity in the education department or in the municipal office
      required neither mental effort, nor talent, nor personal ability, nor
      creative spiritual impulse; it was purely mechanical, and such
      intellectual work seemed to me lower than manual labour. I despise it and
      I do not think that it for a moment justifies an idle, careless life,
      because it is nothing but a swindle, and only a kind of idleness. In all
      probability I have never known real intellectual work.
    

      It was evening. We lived in Great Gentry Street—the chief street in
      the town—and our rank and fashion walked up and down it in the
      evenings, as there were no public gardens. The street was very charming,
      and was almost as good as a garden, for it had two rows of poplar-trees,
      which smelt very sweet, especially after rain, and acacias, and tall
      trees, and apple-trees hung over the fences and hedges. May evenings, the
      scent of the lilac, the hum of the cockchafers, the warm, still air—how
      new and extraordinary it all is, though spring comes every year! I stood
      by the gate and looked at the passers-by. With most of them I had grown up
      and had played with them, but now my presence might upset them, because I
      was poorly dressed, in unfashionable clothes, and people made fun of my
      very narrow trousers and large, clumsy boots, and called them
      macaroni-on-steamboats. And I had a bad reputation in the town because I
      had no position and went to play billiards in low cafés, and had
      once been taken up, for no particular offence, by the political police.
    

      In a large house opposite, Dolyhikov's, the engineer's, some one was
      playing the piano. It was beginning to get dark and the stars were
      beginning to shine. And slowly, answering people's salutes, my father
      passed with my sister on his arm. He was wearing an old top hat with a
      broad curly brim.
    

      "Look!" he said to my sister, pointing to the sky with the very umbrella
      with which he had just struck me. "Look at the sky! Even the smallest
      stars are worlds! How insignificant man is in comparison with the
      universe."
    

      And he said this in a tone that seemed to convey that he found it
      extremely flattering and pleasant to be so insignificant. What an
      untalented man he was! Unfortunately, he was the only architect in the
      town, and during the last fifteen or twenty years I could not remember one
      decent house being built. When he had to design a house, as a rule he
      would draw first the hall and the drawing-room; as in olden days
      schoolgirls could only begin to dance by the fireplace, so his artistic
      ideas could only evolve from the hall and drawing-room. To them he would
      add the dining-room, nursery, study, connecting them with doors, so that
      in the end they were just so many passages, and each room had two or three
      doors too many. His houses were obscure, extremely confused, and limited.
      Every time, as though he felt something was missing, he had recourse to
      various additions, plastering them one on top of the other, and there
      would be various lobbies, and passages, and crooked staircases leading to
      the entresol, where it was only possible to stand in a stooping position,
      and where instead of a floor there would be a thin flight of stairs like a
      Russian bath, and the kitchen would always be under the house with a
      vaulted ceiling and a brick floor. The front of his houses always had a
      hard, stubborn expression, with stiff, French lines, low, squat roofs, and
      fat, pudding-like chimneys surmounted with black cowls and squeaking
      weathercocks. And somehow all the houses built by my father were like each
      other, and vaguely reminded me of a top hat, and the stiff, obstinate back
      of his head. In the course of time the people of the town grew used to my
      father's lack of talent, which took root and became our style.
    

      My father introduced the style into my sister's life. To begin with, he
      gave her the name of Cleopatra (and he called me Misail). When she was a
      little girl he used to frighten her by telling her about the stars and our
      ancestors; and explained the nature of life and duty to her at great
      length; and now when she was twenty-six he went on in the same way,
      allowing her to take no one's arm but his own, and somehow imagining that
      sooner or later an ardent young man would turn up and wish to enter into
      marriage with her out of admiration for his qualities. And she adored my
      father, was afraid of him, and believed in his extraordinary intellectual
      powers.
    

      It got quite dark and the street grew gradually empty. In the house
      opposite the music stopped. The gate was wide open and out into the
      street, careering with all its bells jingling, came a troika. It was the
      engineer and his daughter going for a drive. Time to go to bed!
    

      I had a room in the house, but I lived in the courtyard in a hut, under
      the same roof as the coach-house, which had been built probably as a
      harness-room—for there were big nails in the walls—but now it
      was not used, and my father for thirty years had kept his newspapers
      there, which for some reason he had bound half-yearly and then allowed no
      one to touch. Living there I was less in touch with my father and his
      guests, and I used to think that if I did not live in a proper room and
      did not go to the house every day for meals, my father's reproach that I
      was living on him lost some of its sting.
    

      My sister was waiting for me. She had brought me supper unknown to my
      father; a small piece of cold veal and a slice of bread. In the family
      there were sayings: "Money loves an account," or "A copeck saves a
      rouble," and so on, and my sister, impressed by such wisdom, did her best
      to cut down expenses and made us feed rather meagrely. She put the plate
      on the table, sat on my bed, and began to cry.
    

      "Misail," she said, "what are you doing to us?"
    

      She did not cover her face, her tears ran down her cheeks and hands, and
      her expression was sorrowful. She fell on the pillow, gave way to her
      tears, trembling all over and sobbing.
    

      "You have left your work again!" she said. "How awful!"
    

      "Do try to understand, sister!" I said, and because she cried I was filled
      with despair.
    

      As though it were deliberately arranged, the paraffin in my little lamp
      ran out, and the lamp smoked and guttered, and the old hooks in the wall
      looked terrible and their shadows flickered.
    

      "Spare us!" said my sister, rising up. "Father is in an awful state, and I
      am ill. I shall go mad. What will become of you?" she asked, sobbing and
      holding out her hands to me. "I ask you, I implore you, in the name of our
      dear mother, to go back to your work."
    

      "I cannot, Cleopatra," I said, feeling that only a little more would make
      me give in. "I cannot."
    

      "Why?" insisted my sister, "why? If you have not made it up with your
      chief, look for another place. For instance, why shouldn't you work on the
      railway? I have just spoken to Aniuta Blagovo, and she assures me you
      would be taken on, and she even promised to do what she could for you. For
      goodness sake, Misail, think! Think it over, I implore you!"
    

      We talked a little longer and I gave in. I said that the thought of
      working on the railway had never come into my head, and that I was ready
      to try.
    

      She smiled happily through her tears and clasped my hand, and still she
      cried, because she could not stop, and I went into the kitchen for
      paraffin.
    

      II
    

      Among the supporters of amateur theatricals, charity concerts, and tableaux
      vivants the leaders were the Azhoguins, who lived in their own house
      in Great Gentry house the Street. They used to lend their house and assume
      the necessary trouble and expense. They were a rich landowning family, and
      had about three thousand urskins, with a magnificent farm in the
      neighbourhood, but they did not care for village life and lived in the
      town summer and winter. The family consisted of a mother, a tall, spare,
      delicate lady, who had short hair, wore a blouse and a plain skirt
      à l'Anglais, and three daughters, who were spoken of, not by their
      names, but as the eldest, the middle, and the youngest; they all had ugly,
      sharp chins, and they were short-sighted, high-shouldered, dressed in the
      same style as their mother, had an unpleasant lisp, and yet they always
      took part in every play and were always doing something for charity—acting,
      reciting, singing. They were very serious and never smiled, and even in
      burlesque operettas they acted without gaiety and with a businesslike air,
      as though they were engaged in bookkeeping.
    

      I loved our plays, especially the rehearsals, which were frequent, rather
      absurd, and noisy, and we were always given supper after them. I had no
      part in the selection of the pieces and the casting of the characters. I
      had to look after the stage. I used to design the scenery and copy out the
      parts, and prompt and make up. And I also had to look after the various
      effects such as thunder, the singing of a nightingale, and so on. Having
      no social position, I had no decent clothes, and during rehearsals had to
      hold aloof from the others in the darkened wings and shyly say nothing.
    

      I used to paint the scenery in the Azhoguins' coach-house or yard. I was
      assisted by a house-painter, or, as he called himself, a decorating
      contractor, named Andrey Ivanov, a man of about fifty, tall and very thin
      and pale, with a narrow chest, hollow temples, and dark rings under his
      eyes, he was rather awful to look at. He had some kind of wasting disease,
      and every spring and autumn he was said to be on the point of death, but
      he would go to bed for a while and then get up and say with surprise: "I'm
      not dead this time!"
    

      In the town he was called Radish, and people said it was his real name. He
      loved the theatre as much as I, and no sooner did he hear that a play was
      in hand than he gave up all his work and went to the Azhoguins' to paint
      scenery.
    

      The day after my conversation with my sister I worked from morning till
      night at the Azhoguins'. The rehearsal was fixed for seven o'clock, and an
      hour before it began all the players were assembled, and the eldest, the
      middle, and the youngest Miss Azhoguin were reading their parts on the
      stage. Radish, in a long, brown overcoat with a scarf wound round his
      neck, was standing, leaning with his head against the wall, looking at the
      stage with a rapt expression. Mrs. Azhoguin went from guest to guest
      saying something pleasant to every one. She had a way of gazing into one's
      face and speaking in a hushed voice as though she were telling a secret.
    

      "It must be difficult to paint scenery," she said softly, coming up to me.
      "I was just talking to Mrs. Mufke about prejudice when I saw you come in.
      Mon Dieu! All my life I have struggled against prejudice. To convince the
      servants that all their superstitions are nonsense I always light three
      candles, and I begin all my important business on the thirteenth."
    

      The daughter of Dolyhikov, the engineer, was there, a handsome, plump,
      fair girl, dressed, as people said in our town, in Parisian style. She did
      not act, but at rehearsals a chair was put for her on the stage, and the
      plays did not begin until she appeared in the front row, to astonish
      everybody with the brilliance of her clothes. As coming from the
      metropolis, she was allowed to make remarks during rehearsals, and she did
      so with an affable, condescending smile, and it was clear that she
      regarded our plays as a childish amusement. It was said that she had
      studied singing at the Petersburg conservatoire and had sung for a winter
      season in opera. I liked her very much, and during rehearsals or the
      performance, I never took my eyes off her.
    

      I had taken the book and began to prompt when suddenly my sister appeared.
      Without taking off her coat and hat she came up to me and said:
    

      "Please come!"
    

      I went. Behind the stage in the doorway stood Aniuta Blagovo, also wearing
      a hat with a dark veil. She was the daughter of the vice-president of the
      Court, who had been appointed to our town years ago, almost as soon as the
      High Court was established. She was tall and had a good figure, and was
      considered indispensable for the tableaux vivants, and when she
      represented a fairy or a muse, her face would burn with shame; but she
      took no part in the plays, and would only look in at rehearsals, on some
      business, and never enter the hall. And it was evident now that she had
      only looked in for a moment.
    

      "My father has mentioned you," she said drily, not looking at me and
      blushing.... "Dolyhikov has promised to find you something to do on the
      railway. If you go to his house to-morrow, he will see you."
    

      I bowed and thanked her for her kindness.
    

      "And you must leave this," she said, pointing to my book.
    

      She and my sister went up to Mrs. Azhoguin and began to whisper, looking
      at me.
    

      "Indeed," said Mrs. Azhoguin, coming up to me, and gazing into my face.
      "Indeed, if it takes you from your more serious business"—she took
      the book out of my hands—"then you must hand it over to some one
      else. Don't worry, my friend. It will be all right."
    

      I said good-bye and left in some confusion. As I went down-stairs I saw my
      sister and Aniuta Blagovo going away; they were talking animatedly, I
      suppose about my going on the railway, and they hurried away. My sister
      had never been to a rehearsal before, and she was probably tortured by her
      conscience and by her fear of my father finding out that she had been to
      the Azhoguins' without permission.
    

      The next day I went to see Dolyhikov at one o'clock. The man servant
      showed me into a charming room, which was the engineer's drawing-room and
      study. Everything in it was charming and tasteful, and to a man like
      myself, unused to such things, very strange. Costly carpets, huge chairs,
      bronzes, pictures in gold and velvet frames; photographs on the walls of
      beautiful women, clever, handsome faces, and striking attitudes; from the
      drawing-room a door led straight into the garden, by a veranda, and I saw
      lilac and a table laid for breakfast, rolls, and a bunch of roses; and
      there was a smell of spring, and good cigars, and happiness—and
      everything seemed to say, here lives a man who has worked and won the
      highest happiness here on earth. At the table the engineer's daughter was
      sitting reading a newspaper.
    

      "Do you want my father?" she asked. "He is having a shower-bath. He will
      be down presently. Please take a chair."
    

      I sat down.
    

      "I believe you live opposite?" she asked after a short silence.
    

      "Yes."
    

      "When I have nothing to do I look out of the window. You must excuse me,"
      she added, turning to her newspaper, "and I often see you and your sister.
      She has such a kind, wistful expression."
    

      Dolyhikov came in. He was wiping his neck with a towel.
    

      "Papa, this is Mr. Pologniev," said his daughter.
    

      "Yes, yes. Blagovo spoke to me." He turned quickly to me, but did not hold
      out his hand. "But what do you think I can give you? I'm not bursting with
      situations. You are queer people!" he went on in a loud voice and as
      though he were scolding me. "I get about twenty people every day, as
      though I were a Department of State. I run a railway, sir. I employ hard
      labour; I need mechanics, navvies, joiners, well-sinkers, and you can only
      sit and write. That's all! You are all clerks!"
    

      And he exhaled the same air of happiness as his carpets and chairs. He was
      stout, healthy, with red cheeks and a broad chest; he looked clean in his
      pink shirt and wide trousers, just like a china figure of a post-boy. He
      had a round, bristling beard—and not a single grey hair—and a
      nose with a slight bridge, and bright, innocent, dark eyes.
    

      "What can you do?" he went on. "Nothing! I am an engineer and well-to-do,
      but before I was given this railway I worked very hard for a long time. I
      was an engine-driver for two years, I worked in Belgium as an ordinary
      lubricator. Now, my dear man, just think—what work can I offer you?"
    

      "I quite agree," said I, utterly abashed, not daring to meet his bright,
      innocent eyes.
    

      "Are you any good with the telegraph?" he asked after some thought.
    

      "Yes. I have been in the telegraph service."
    

      "Hm.... Well, we'll see. Go to Dubechnia. There's a fellow there already.
      But he is a scamp."
    

      "And what will my duties be?" I asked.
    

      "We'll see to that later. Go there now. I'll give orders. But please don't
      drivel and don't bother me with petitions or I'll kick you out."
    

      He turned away from me without even a nod. I bowed to him and his
      daughter, who was reading the newspaper, and went out. I felt so miserable
      that when my sister asked how the engineer had received me, I could not
      utter a single word.
    

      To go to Dubechnia I got up early in the morning at sunrise. There was not
      a soul in the street, the whole town was asleep, and my footsteps rang out
      with a hollow sound. The dewy poplars filled the air with a soft scent. I
      was sad and had no desire to leave the town. It seemed so nice and warm! I
      loved the green trees, the quiet sunny mornings, the ringing of the bells,
      but the people in the town were alien to me, tiresome and sometimes even
      loathsome. I neither liked nor understood them.
    

      I did not understand why or for what purpose those thirty-five thousand
      people lived. I knew that Kimry made a living by manufacturing boots, that
      Tula made samovars and guns, that Odessa was a port; but I did not know
      what our town was or what it did. The people in Great Gentry Street and
      two other clean streets had independent means and salaries paid by the
      Treasury, but how the people lived in the other eight streets which
      stretched parallel to each other for three miles and then were lost behind
      the hill—that was always an insoluble problem to me. And I am
      ashamed to think of the way they lived. They had neither public gardens,
      nor a theatre, nor a decent orchestra; the town and club libraries are
      used only by young Jews, so that books and magazines would lie for months
      uncut. The rich and the intelligentsia slept in close, stuffy bedrooms,
      with wooden beds infested with bugs; the children were kept in filthy,
      dirty rooms called nurseries, and the servants, even when they were old
      and respectable, slept on the kitchen floor and covered themselves with
      rags. Except in Lent all the houses smelt of bortsch, and during
      Lent of sturgeon fried in sunflower oil. The food was unsavoury, the water
      unwholesome. On the town council, at the governor's, at the archbishop's,
      everywhere there had been talk for years about there being no good, cheap
      water-supply and of borrowing two hundred thousand roubles from the
      Treasury. Even the very rich people, of whom there were about thirty in
      the town, people who would lose a whole estate at cards, used to drink the
      bad water and talk passionately about the loan—and I could never
      understand this, for it seemed to me it would be simpler for them to pay
      up the two hundred thousand.
    

      I did not know a single honest man in the whole town. My father took
      bribes, and imagined they were given to him out of respect for his
      spiritual qualities; the boys at the high school, in order to be promoted,
      went to lodge with the masters and paid them large sums; the wife of the
      military commandant took levies from the recruits during the recruiting,
      and even allowed them to stand her drinks, and once she was so drunk in
      church that she could not get up from her knees; during the recruiting the
      doctors also took bribes, and the municipal doctor and the veterinary
      surgeon levied taxes on the butcher shops and public houses; the district
      school did a trade in certificates which gave certain privileges in the
      civil service; the provosts took bribes from the clergy and church-wardens
      whom they controlled, and on the town council and various committees every
      one who came before them was pursued with: "One expects thanks!"—and
      thereby forty copecks had to change hands. And those who did not take
      bribes, like the High Court officials, were stiff and proud, and shook
      hands with two fingers, and were distinguished by their indifference and
      narrow-mindedness. They drank and played cards, married rich women, and
      always had a bad, insidious influence on those round them. Only the girls
      had any moral purity; most of them had lofty aspirations and were pure and
      honest at heart; but they knew nothing of life, and believed that bribes
      were given to honour spiritual qualities; and when they married, they soon
      grew old and weak, and were hopelessly lost in the mire of that vulgar,
      bourgeois existence.
    

      III
    

      A railway was being built in our district. On holidays and thereabouts the
      town was filled with crowds of ragamuffins called "railies," of whom the
      people were afraid. I used often to see a miserable wretch with a bloody
      face, and without a hat, being dragged off by the police, and behind him
      was the proof of his crime, a samovar or some wet, newly washed linen. The
      "railies" used to collect near the public houses and on the squares; and
      they drank, ate, and swore terribly, and whistled after the town
      prostitutes. To amuse these ruffians our shopkeepers used to make the cats
      and dogs drink vodka, or tie a kerosene-tin to a dog's tail, and whistle
      to make the dog come tearing along the street with the tin clattering
      after him, and making him squeal with terror and think he had some
      frightful monster hard at his heels, so that he would rush out of the town
      and over the fields until he could run no more. We had several dogs in the
      town which were left with a permanent shiver and used to crawl about with
      their tails between their legs, and people said that they could not stand
      such tricks and had gone mad.
    

      The station was being built five miles from the town. It was said that the
      engineer had asked for a bribe of fifty thousand roubles to bring the
      station nearer, but the municipality would only agree to forty; they would
      not give in to the extra ten thousand, and now the townspeople are sorry
      because they had to make a road to the station which cost them more.
      Sleepers and rails were fixed all along the line, and service-trains were
      running to carry building materials and labourers, and they were only
      waiting for the bridges upon which Dolyhikov was at work, and here and
      there the stations were not ready.
    

      Dubechnia—the name of our first station—was seventeen versts
      from the town. I went on foot. The winter and spring corn was bright
      green, shining in the morning sun. The road was smooth and bright, and in
      the distance I could see in outline the station, the hills, and the remote
      farmhouses.... How good it was out in the open! And how I longed to be
      filled with the sense of freedom, if only for that morning, to stop
      thinking of what was going on in the town, or of my needs, or even of
      eating! Nothing has so much prevented my living as the feeling of acute
      hunger, which make my finest thoughts get mixed up with thoughts of
      porridge, cutlets, and fried fish. When I stand alone in the fields and
      look up at the larks hanging marvellously in the air, and bursting with
      hysterical song, I think: "It would be nice to have some bread and
      butter." Or when I sit in the road and shut my eyes and listen to the
      wonderful sounds of a May-day, I remember how good hot potatoes smell.
      Being big and of a strong constitution I never have quite enough to eat,
      and so my chief sensation during the day is hunger, and so I can
      understand why so many people who are working for a bare living, can talk
      of nothing but food.
    

      At Dubechnia the station was being plastered inside, and the upper story
      of the water-tank was being built. It was close and smelt of lime, and the
      labourers were wandering lazily over piles of chips and rubbish. The
      signalman was asleep near his box with the sun pouring straight into his
      face. There was not a single tree. The telephone gave a faint hum, and
      here and there birds had alighted on it. I wandered over the heaps, not
      knowing what to do, and remembered how when I asked the engineer what my
      duties would be, he had replied: "We will see there." But what was there
      to see in such a wilderness? The plasterers were talking about the foreman
      and about one Fedot Vassilievich. I could not understand and was filled
      with embarrassment—physical embarrassment. I felt conscious of my
      arms and legs, and of the whole of my big body, and did not know what to
      do with them or where to go.
    

      After walking for at least a couple of hours I noticed that from the
      station to the right of the line there were telegraph-poles which after
      about one and a half or two miles ended in a white stone wall. The
      labourers said it was the office, and I decided at last that I must go
      there.
    

      It was a very old farmhouse, long unused. The wall of rough, white stone
      was decayed, and in places had crumbled away, and the roof of the wing,
      the blind wall of which looked toward the railway, had perished, and was
      patched here and there with tin. Through the gates there was a large yard,
      overgrown with tall grass, and beyond that, an old house with Venetian
      blinds in the windows, and a high roof, brown with rot. On either side of
      the house, to right and left, were two symmetrical wings; the windows of
      one were boarded up, while by the other, the windows of which were open,
      there were a number of calves grazing. The last telegraph-pole stood in
      the yard, and the wire went from it to the wing with the blind wall. The
      door was open and I went in. By the table at the telegraph was sitting a
      man with a dark, curly head in a canvas coat; he glared at me sternly and
      askance, but he immediately smiled and said:
    

      "How do you do, Profit?"
    

      It was Ivan Cheprakov, my school friend, who was expelled, when he was in
      the second class, for smoking. Once, during the autumn, we were out
      catching goldfinches, starlings, and hawfinches, to sell them in the
      market early in the morning when our parents were still asleep.
    

      We beat up flocks of starlings and shot at them with pellets, and then
      picked up the wounded, and some died in terrible agony—I can still
      remember how they moaned at night in my case—and some recovered. And
      we sold them, and swore black and blue that they were male birds. Once in
      the market I had only one starling left, which I hawked about and finally
      sold for a copeck. "A little profit!" I said to console myself, and from
      that time at school I was always known as "Little Profit," and even now,
      schoolboys and the townspeople sometimes use the name to tease me, though
      no one but myself remembers how it came about.
    

      Cheprakov never was strong. He was narrow-chested, round-shouldered,
      long-legged. His tie looked like a piece of string, he had no waistcoat,
      and his boots were worse than mine—with the heels worn down. He
      blinked with his eyes and had an eager expression as though he were trying
      to catch something and he was in a constant fidget.
    

      "You wait," he said, bustling about. "Look here!... What was I saying just
      now?"
    

      We began to talk. I discovered that the estate had till recently belonged
      to the Cheprakovs and only the previous autumn had passed to Dolyhikov,
      who thought it more profitable to keep his money in land than in shares,
      and had already bought three big estates in our district with the transfer
      of all mortgages. When Cheprakov's mother sold, she stipulated for the
      right to live in one of the wings for another two years and got her son a
      job in the office.
    

      "Why shouldn't he buy?" said Cheprakov of the engineer. "He gets a lot
      from the contractors. He bribes them all."
    

      Then he took me to dinner, deciding in his emphatic way that I was to live
      with him in the wing and board with his mother.
    

      "She is a screw," he said, "but she will not take much from you."
    

      In the small rooms where his mother lived there was a queer jumble; even
      the hall and the passage were stacked with furniture, which had been taken
      from the house after the sale of the estate; and the furniture was old,
      and of redwood. Mrs. Cheprakov, a very stout elderly lady, with slanting,
      Chinese eyes, sat by the window, in a big chair, knitting a stocking. She
      received me ceremoniously.
    

      "It is Pologniev, mother," said Cheprakov, introducing me. "He is going to
      work here."
    

      "Are you a nobleman?" she asked in a strange, unpleasant voice as though
      she had boiling fat in her throat.
    

      "Yes," I answered.
    

      "Sit down."
    

      The dinner was bad. It consisted only of a pie with unsweetened curds and
      some milk soup. Elena Nikifirovna, my hostess, was perpetually winking,
      first with one eye, then with the other. She talked and ate, but in her
      whole aspect there was a deathlike quality, and one could almost detect
      the smell of a corpse. Life hardly stirred in her, yet she had the air of
      being the lady of the manor, who had once had her serfs, and was the wife
      of a general, whose servants had to call him "Your Excellency," and when
      these miserable embers of life flared up in her for a moment, she would
      say to her son:
    

      "Ivan, that is not the way to hold your knife!"
    

      Or she would say, gasping for breath, with the preciseness of a hostess
      labouring to entertain her guest:
    

      "We have just sold our estate, you know. It is a pity, of course, we have
      got so used to being here, but Dolyhikov promised to make Ivan
      station-master at Dubechnia, so that we shan't have to leave. We shall
      live here on the station, which is the same as living on the estate. The
      engineer is such a nice man! Don't you think him very handsome?"
    

      Until recently the Cheprakovs had been very well-to-do, but with the
      general's death everything changed. Elena Nikifirovna began to quarrel
      with the neighbours and to go to law, and she did not pay her bailiffs and
      labourers; she was always afraid of being robbed—and in less than
      ten years Dubechnia changed completely.
    

      Behind the house there was an old garden run wild, overgrown with tall
      grass and brushwood. I walked along the terrace which was still well-kept
      and beautiful; through the glass door I saw a room with a parquet floor,
      which must have been the drawing-room. It contained an ancient piano, some
      engravings in mahogany frames on the walls—and nothing else. There
      was nothing left of the flower-garden but peonies and poppies, rearing
      their white and scarlet heads above the ground; on the paths, all huddled
      together, were young maples and elm-trees, which had been stripped by the
      cows. The growth was dense and the garden seemed impassable, and only near
      the house, where there still stood poplars, firs, and some old bricks,
      were there traces of the former avenues, and further on the garden was
      being cleared for a hay-field, and here it was no longer allowed to run
      wild, and one's mouth and eyes were no longer filled with spiders' webs,
      and a pleasant air was stirring. The further out one went, the more open
      it was, and there were cherry-trees, plum-trees, wide-spreading old
      apple-trees, lichened and held up with props, and the pear-trees were so
      tall that it was incredible that there could be pears on them. This part
      of the garden was let to the market-women of our town, and it was guarded
      from thieves and starlings by a peasant—an idiot who lived in a hut.
    

      The orchard grew thinner and became a mere meadow running down to the
      river, which was overgrown with reeds and withy-beds. There was a pool by
      the mill-dam, deep and full of fish, and a little mill with a straw roof
      ground and roared, and the frogs croaked furiously. On the water, which
      was as smooth as glass, circles appeared from time to time, and
      water-lilies trembled on the impact of a darting fish. The village of
      Dubechnia was on the other side of the river. The calm, azure pool was
      alluring with its promise of coolness and rest. And now all this, the
      pool, the mill, the comfortable banks of the river, belonged to the
      engineer!
    

      And here my new work began. I received and despatched telegrams, I wrote
      out various accounts and copied orders, claims, and reports, sent in to
      the office by our illiterate foremen and mechanics. But most of the day I
      did nothing, walking up and down the room waiting for telegrams, or I
      would tell the boy to stay in the wing, and go into the garden until the
      boy came to say the bell was ringing. I had dinner with Mrs. Cheprakov.
      Meat was served very rarely; most of the dishes were made of milk, and on
      Wednesdays and Fridays we had Lenten fare, and the food was served in pink
      plates, which were called Lenten. Mrs. Cheprakov was always blinking—the
      habit grew on her, and I felt awkward and embarrassed in her presence.
    

      As there was not enough work for one, Cheprakov did nothing, but slept or
      went down to the pool with his gun to shoot ducks. In the evenings he got
      drunk in the village, or at the station, and before going to bed he would
      look in the glass and say:
    

      "How are you, Ivan Cheprakov?"
    

      When he was drunk, he was very pale and used to rub his hands and laugh,
      or rather neigh, He-he-he! Out of bravado he would undress himself and run
      naked through the fields, and he used to eat flies and say they were a bit
      sour.
    

      IV
    

      Once after dinner he came running into the wing, panting, to say:
    

      "Your sister has come to see you."
    

      I went out and saw a fly standing by the steps of the house. My sister had
      brought Aniuta Blagovo and a military gentleman in a summer uniform. As I
      approached I recognised the military gentleman as Aniuta's brother, the
      doctor.
    

      "We've come to take you for a picnic," he said, "if you've no objection."
    

      My sister and Aniuta wanted to ask how I was getting on, but they were
      both silent and only looked at me. They felt that I didn't like my job,
      and tears came into my sister's eyes and Aniuta Blagovo blushed. We went
      into the orchard, the doctor first, and he said ecstatically:
    

      "What air! By Jove, what air!"
    

      He was just a boy to look at. He talked and walked like an undergraduate,
      and the look in his grey eyes was as lively, simple, and frank as that of
      a nice boy. Compared with his tall, handsome sister he looked weak and
      slight, and his little beard was thin and so was his voice—a thin
      tenor, though quite pleasant. He was away somewhere with his regiment and
      had come home on leave, and said that he was going to Petersburg in the
      autumn to take his M.D. He already had a family—a wife and three
      children; he had married young, in his second year at the University, and
      people said he was unhappily married and was not living with his wife.
    

      "What is the time?" My sister was uneasy. "We must go back soon, for my
      father would only let me have until six o'clock."
    

      "Oh, your father," sighed the doctor.
    

      I made tea, and we drank it sitting on a carpet in front of the terrace,
      and the doctor, kneeling, drank from his saucer, and said that he was
      perfectly happy. Then Cheprakov fetched the key and unlocked the glass
      door and we all entered the house. It was dark and mysterious and smelled
      of mushrooms, and our footsteps made a hollow sound as though there were a
      vault under the floor. The doctor stopped by the piano and touched the
      keys and it gave out a faint, tremulous, cracked but still melodious
      sound. He raised his voice and began to sing a romance, frowning and
      impatiently stamping his foot when he touched a broken key. My sister
      forgot about going home, but walked agitatedly up and down the room and
      said:
    

      "I am happy! I am very, very happy!"
    

      There was a note of surprise in her voice as though it seemed impossible
      to her that she should be happy. It was the first time in my life that I
      had seen her so gay. She even looked handsome. Her profile was not good,
      her nose and mouth somehow protruded and made her look as if she was
      always blowing, but she had beautiful, dark eyes, a pale, very delicate
      complexion, and a touching expression of kindness and sadness, and when
      she spoke she seemed very charming and even beautiful. Both she and I took
      after our mother; we were broad-shouldered, strong, and sturdy, but her
      paleness was a sign of sickness, she often coughed, and in her eyes I
      often noticed the expression common to people who are ill, but who for
      some reason conceal it. In her present cheerfulness there was something
      childish and naïve, as though all the joy which had been suppressed
      and dulled during our childhood by a strict upbringing, had suddenly
      awakened in her soul and rushed out into freedom.
    

      But when evening came and the fly was brought round, my sister became very
      quiet and subdued, and sat in the fly as though it were a prison-van.
    

      Soon they were all gone. The noise of the fly died away.... I remembered
      that Aniuta Blagovo had said not a single word to me all day.
    

      "A wonderful girl!" I thought "A wonderful girl."
    

      Lent came and every day we had Lenten dishes. I was greatly depressed by
      my idleness and the uncertainty of my position, and, slothful, hungry,
      dissatisfied with myself, I wandered over the estate and only waited for
      an energetic mood to leave the place.
    

      Once in the afternoon when Radish was sitting in our wing, Dolyhikov
      entered unexpectedly, very sunburnt, and grey with dust. He had been out
      on the line for three days and had come to Dubechnia on a locomotive and
      walked over. While he waited for the carriage which he had ordered to come
      out to meet him he went over the estate with his bailiff, giving orders in
      a loud voice, and then for a whole hour he sat in our wing and wrote
      letters. When telegrams came through for him, he himself tapped out the
      answers, while we stood there stiff and silent.
    

      "What a mess!" he said, looking angrily through the accounts. "I shall
      transfer the office to the station in a fortnight and I don't know what I
      shall do with you then."
    

      "I've done my best, sir," said Cheprakov.
    

      "Quite so. I can see what your best is. You can only draw your wages." The
      engineer looked at me and went on. "You rely on getting introductions to
      make a career for yourself with as little trouble as possible. Well, I
      don't care about introductions. Nobody helped me. Before I had this line,
      I was an engine-driver. I worked in Belgium as an ordinary lubricator. And
      what are you doing here, Panteley?" he asked, turning to Radish. "Going
      out drinking?"
    

      For some reason or other he called all simple people Panteley, while he
      despised men like Cheprakov and myself, and called us drunkards, beasts,
      canaille. As a rule he was hard on petty officials, and paid and dismissed
      them ruthlessly without any explanation.
    

      At last the carriage came for him. When he left he promised to dismiss us
      all in a fortnight; called the bailiff a fool, stretched himself out
      comfortably in the carriage, and drove away.
    

      "Andrey Ivanich," I said to Radish, "will you take me on as a labourer?"
    

      "What! Why?"
    

      We went together toward the town, and when the station and the farm were
      far behind us, I asked:
    

      "Andrey Ivanich, why did you come to Dubechnia?"
    

      "Firstly because some of my men are working on the line, and secondly to
      pay interest to Mrs. Cheprakov. I borrowed fifty roubles from her last
      summer, and now I pay her one rouble a month."
    

      The decorator stopped and took hold of my coat.
    

      "Misail Alereich, my friend," he went on, "I take it that if a common man
      or a gentleman takes interest, he is a wrong-doer. The truth is not in
      him."
    

      Radish, looking thin, pale, and rather terrible, shut his eyes, shook his
      head, and muttered in a philosophic tone:
    

      "The grub eats grass, rust eats iron, lies devour the soul. God save us
      miserable sinners!"
    

      V
    

      Radish was unpractical and he was no business man; he undertook more work
      than he could do, and when he came to payment he always lost his reckoning
      and so was always out on the wrong side. He was a painter, a glazier, a
      paper-hanger, and would even take on tiling, and I remember how he used to
      run about for days looking for tiles to make an insignificant profit. He
      was an excellent workman and would sometimes earn ten roubles a day, and
      but for his desire to be a master and to call himself a contractor, he
      would probably have made quite a lot of money.
    

      He himself was paid by contract and paid me and the others by the day,
      between seventy-five copecks and a rouble per day. When the weather was
      hot and dry he did various outside jobs, chiefly painting roofs. Not being
      used to it, my feet got hot, as though I were walking over a red-hot oven,
      and when I wore felt boots my feet swelled. But this was only at the
      beginning. Later on I got used to it and everything went all right. I
      lived among the people, to whom work was obligatory and unavoidable,
      people who worked like dray-horses, and knew nothing of the moral value of
      labour, and never even used the word "labour" in their talk. Among them I
      also felt like a dray-horse, more and more imbued with the necessity and
      inevitability of what I was doing, and this made my life easier, and saved
      me from doubt.
    

      At first everything amused me, everything was new. It was like being born
      again. I could sleep on the ground and go barefoot—and found it
      exceedingly pleasant. I could stand in a crowd of simple folks, without
      embarrassing them, and when a cab-horse fell down in the street, I used to
      run and help it up without being afraid of soiling my clothes. But, best
      of all, I was living independently and was not a burden on any one.
    

      The painting of roofs, especially when we mixed our own paint, was
      considered a very profitable business, and, therefore, even such good
      workmen as Radish did not shun this rough and tiresome work. In short
      trousers, showing his lean, muscular legs, he used to prowl over the roof
      like a stork, and I used to hear him sigh wearily as he worked his brush:
    

      "Woe, woe to us, miserable sinners!"
    

      He could walk as easily on a roof as on the ground. In spite of his
      looking so ill and pale and corpse-like, his agility was extraordinary;
      like any young man he would paint the cupola and the top of the church
      without scaffolding, using only ladders and a rope, and it was queer and
      strange when, standing there, far above the ground, he would rise to his
      full height and cry to the world at large:
    

      "Grubs eat grass, rust eats iron, lies devour the soul!"
    

      Or, thinking of something, he would suddenly answer his own thought:
    

      "Anything may happen! Anything may happen!"
    

      When I went home from work all the people sitting outside their doors, the
      shop assistants, dogs, and their masters, used to shout after me and jeer
      spitefully, and at first it seemed monstrous and distressed me greatly.
    

      "Little Profit," they used to shout. "House-painter! Yellow ochre!"
    

      And no one treated me so unmercifully as those who had only just risen
      above the people and had quite recently had to work for their living. Once
      in the market-place as I passed the ironmonger's a can of water was
      spilled over me as if by accident, and once a stick was thrown at me. And
      once a fishmonger, a grey-haired old man, stood in my way and looked at me
      morosely and said:
    

      "It isn't you I'm sorry for, you fool, it's your father."
    

      And when my acquaintances met me they got confused. Some regarded me as a
      queer fish and a fool, and they were sorry for me; others did not know how
      to treat me and it was difficult to understand them. Once, in the daytime,
      in one of the streets off Great Gentry Street, I met Aniuta Blagovo. I was
      on my way to my work and was carrying two long brushes and a pot of paint.
      When she recognised me, Aniuta blushed.
    

      "Please do not acknowledge me in the street," she said nervously, sternly,
      in a trembling voice, without offering to shake hands with me, and tears
      suddenly gleamed in her eyes. "If you must be like this, then, so—so
      be it, but please avoid me in public!"
    

      I had left Great Gentry Street and was living in a suburb called Makarikha
      with my nurse Karpovna, a good-natured but gloomy old woman who was always
      looking for evil, and was frightened by her dreams, and saw omens and ill
      in the bees and wasps which flew into her room. And in her opinion my
      having become a working man boded no good.
    

      "You are lost!" she said mournfully, shaking her head. "Lost!"
    

      With her in her little house lived her adopted son, Prokofyi, a butcher, a
      huge, clumsy fellow, of about thirty, with ginger hair and scrubby
      moustache. When he met me in the hall, he would silently and respectfully
      make way for me, and when he was drunk he would salute me with his whole
      hand. In the evenings he used to have supper, and through the wooden
      partition I could hear him snorting and snuffling as he drank glass after
      glass.
    

      "Mother," he would say in an undertone.
    

      "Well," Karpovna would reply. She was passionately fond of him. "What is
      it, my son?"
    

      "I'll do you a favour, mother. I'll feed you in your old age in this vale
      of tears, and when you die I'll bury you at my own expense. So I say and
      so I'll do."
    

      I used to get up every day before sunrise and go to bed early. We painters
      ate heavily and slept soundly, and only during the night would we have any
      excitement. I never quarrelled with my comrades. All day long there was a
      ceaseless stream of abuse, cursing and hearty good wishes, as, for
      instance, that one's eyes should burst, or that one might be carried off
      by cholera, but, all the same, among ourselves we were very friendly. The
      men suspected me of being a religious crank and used to laugh at me
      good-naturedly, saying that even my own father denounced me, and they used
      to say that they very seldom went to church and that many of them had not
      been to confession for ten years, and they justified their laxness by
      saying that a decorator is among men like a jackdaw among birds.
    

      My mates respected me and regarded me with esteem; they evidently liked my
      not drinking or smoking, and leading a quiet, steady life. They were only
      rather disagreeably surprised at my not stealing the oil, or going with
      them to ask our employers for a drink. The stealing of the employers' oil
      and paint was a custom with house-painters, and was not regarded as theft,
      and it was remarkable that even so honest a man as Radish would always
      come away from work with some white lead and oil. And even respectable old
      men who had their own houses in Makarikha were not ashamed to ask for
      tips, and when the men, at the beginning or end of a job, made up to some
      vulgar fool and thanked him humbly for a few pence, I used to feel sick
      and sorry.
    

      With the customers they behaved like sly courtiers, and almost every day I
      was reminded of Shakespeare's Polonius.
    

      "There will probably be rain," a customer would say, staring at the sky.
    

      "It is sure to rain," the painters would agree.
    

      "But the clouds aren't rain-clouds. Perhaps it won't rain."
    

      "No, sir. It won't rain. It won't rain, sure."
    

      Behind their backs they generally regarded the customers ironically, and
      when, for instance, they saw a gentleman sitting on his balcony with a
      newspaper, they would say:
    

      "He reads newspapers, but he has nothing to eat."
    

      I never visited my people. When I returned from work I often found short,
      disturbing notes from my sister about my father; how he was very
      absent-minded at dinner, and then slipped away and locked himself in his
      study and did not come out for a long time. Such news upset me. I could
      not sleep, and I would go sometimes at night and walk along Great Gentry
      Street by our house, and look up at the dark windows, and try to guess if
      all was well within. On Sundays my sister would come to see me, but by
      stealth, as though she came not to see me, but my nurse. And if she came
      into my room she would look pale, with her eyes red, and at once she would
      begin to weep.
    

      "Father cannot bear it much longer," she would say. "If, as God forbid,
      something were to happen to him, it would be on your conscience all your
      life. It is awful, Misail! For mother's sake I implore you to mend your
      ways."
    

      "My dear sister," I replied. "How can I reform when I am convinced that I
      am acting according to my conscience? Do try to understand me!"
    

      "I know you are obeying your conscience, but it ought to be possible to do
      so without hurting anybody."
    

      "Oh, saints above!" the old woman would sigh behind the door. "You are
      lost. There will be a misfortune, my dear. It is bound to come."
    

      VI
    

      On Sunday, Doctor Blagovo came to see me unexpectedly. He was wearing a
      white summer uniform over a silk shirt, and high glacé boots.
    

      "I came to see you!" he began, gripping my hand in his hearty,
      undergraduate fashion. "I hear of you every day and I have long intended
      to go and see you to have a heart-to-heart, as they say. Things are
      awfully boring in the town; there is not a living soul worth talking to.
      How hot it is, by Jove!" he went on, taking off his tunic and standing in
      his silk shirt. "My dear fellow, let us have a talk."
    

      I was feeling bored and longing for other society than that of the
      decorators. I was really glad to see him.
    

      "To begin with," he said, sitting on my bed, "I sympathise with you
      heartily, and I have a profound respect for your present way of living. In
      the town you are misunderstood and there is nobody to understand you,
      because, as you know, it is full of Gogolian pig-faces. But I guessed what
      you were at the picnic. You are a noble soul, an honest, high-minded man!
      I respect you and think it an honour to shake hands with you. To change
      your life so abruptly and suddenly as you did, you must have passed
      through a most trying spiritual process, and to go on with it now, to live
      scrupulously by your convictions, you must have to toil incessantly both
      in mind and in heart. Now, please tell me, don't you think that if you
      spent all this force of will, intensity, and power on something else, like
      trying to be a great scholar or an artist, that your life would be both
      wider and deeper, and altogether more productive?"
    

      We talked and when we came to speak of physical labour, I expressed this
      idea: that it was necessary that the strong should not enslave the weak,
      and that the minority should not be a parasite on the majority, always
      sucking up the finest sap, i. e., it was necessary that all without
      exception—the strong and the weak, the rich and the poor—should
      share equally in the struggle for existence, every man for himself, and in
      that respect there was no better means of levelling than physical labour
      and compulsory service for all.
    

      "You think, then," said the doctor, "that all, without, exception, should
      be employed in physical labour?"
    

      "Yes."
    

      "But don't you think that if everybody, including the best people,
      thinkers and men of science, were to take part in the struggle for
      existence, each man for himself, and took to breaking stones and painting
      roofs, it would be a serious menace to progress?"
    

      "Where is the danger?" I asked. "Progress consists in deeds of love, in
      the fulfilment of the moral law. If you enslave no one, and are a burden
      upon no one, what further progress do you want?"
    

      "But look here!" said Blagovo, suddenly losing his temper and getting up.
      "I say! If a snail in its shell is engaged in self-perfection in obedience
      to the moral law—would you call that progress?"
    

      "But why?" I was nettled. "If you make your neighbours feed you, clothe
      you, carry you, defend you from your enemies, their life is built up on
      slavery, and that is not progress. My view is that that is the most real
      and, perhaps, the only possible, the only progress necessary."
    

      "The limits of universal progress, which is common to all men, are in
      infinity, and it seems to me strange to talk of a 'possible' progress
      limited by our needs and temporal conceptions."
    

      "If the limits of peoples are in infinity, as you say, then it means that
      its goal is indefinite," I said. "Think of living without knowing
      definitely what for!"
    

      "Why not? Your 'not knowing' is not so boring as your 'knowing.' I am
      walking up a ladder which is called progress, civilisation, culture. I go
      on and on, not knowing definitely where I am going to, but surely it is
      worth while living for the sake of the wonderful ladder alone. And you
      know exactly what you are living for—that some should not enslave
      others, that the artist and the man who mixes his colours for him should
      dine together. But that is the bourgeois, kitchen side of life, and isn't
      it disgusting only to live for that? If some insects devour others, devil
      take them, let them! We need not think of them, they will perish and rot,
      however you save them from slavery—we must think of that great Cross
      which awaits all mankind in the distant future."
    

      Blagovo argued hotly with me, but it was noticeable that he was disturbed
      by some outside thought.
    

      "Your sister is not coming," he said, consulting his watch. "Yesterday she
      was at our house and said she was going to see you. You go on talking
      about slavery, slavery," he went on, "but it is a special question, and
      all these questions are solved by mankind gradually."
    

      We began to talk of evolution. I said that every man decides the question
      of good and evil for himself, and does not wait for mankind to solve the
      question by virtue of gradual development. Besides, evolution is a stick
      with two ends. Side by side with the gradual development of humanitarian
      ideas, there is the gradual growth of ideas of a different kind. Serfdom
      is past, and capitalism is growing. And with ideas of liberation at their
      height the majority, just as in the days of Baty, feeds, clothes, and
      defends the minority; and is left hungry, naked, and defenceless. The
      state of things harmonises beautifully with all your tendencies and
      movements, because the art of enslaving is also being gradually developed.
      We no longer flog our servants in the stables, but we give slavery more
      refined forms; at any rate, we are able to justify it in each separate
      case. Ideas remain ideas with us, but if we could, now, at the end of the
      nineteenth century, throw upon the working classes all our most unpleasant
      physiological functions, we should do so, and, of course, we should
      justify ourselves by saying that if the best people, thinkers and great
      scholars, had to waste their time on such functions, progress would be in
      serious jeopardy.
    

      Just then my sister entered. When she saw the doctor, she was flurried and
      excited, and at once began to say that it was time for her to go home to
      her father.
    

      "Cleopatra Alexeyevna," said Blagovo earnestly, laying his hands on his
      heart, "what will happen to your father if you spend half an hour with
      your brother and me?"
    

      He was a simple kind of man and could communicate his cheerfulness to
      others. My sister thought for a minute and began to laugh, and suddenly
      got very happy, suddenly, unexpectedly, just as she did at the picnic. We
      went out into the fields and lay on the grass, and went on with our
      conversation and looked at the town, where all the windows facing the west
      looked golden in the setting sun.
    

      After that Blagovo appeared every time my sister came to see me, and they
      always greeted each other as though their meeting was unexpected. My
      sister used to listen while the doctor and I argued, and her face was
      always joyful and rapturous, admiring and curious, and it seemed to me
      that a new world was slowly being discovered before her eyes, a world
      which she had not seen before even in her dreams, which now she was trying
      to divine; when the doctor was not there she was quiet and sad, and if, as
      she sat on my bed, she sometimes wept, it was for reasons of which she did
      not speak.
    

      In August Radish gave us orders to go to the railway. A couple of days
      before we were "driven" out of town, my father came to see me. He sat down
      and, without looking at me, slowly wiped his red face, then took out of
      his pocket our local paper and read out with deliberate emphasis on each
      word that a schoolfellow of my own age, the son of the director of the
      State Bank, had been appointed chief clerk of the Court of the Exchequer.
    

      "And now, look at yourself," he said, folding up the newspaper. "You are a
      beggar, a vagabond, a scoundrel! Even the bourgeoisie and other peasants
      get education to make themselves decent people, while you, a Pologniev,
      with famous, noble ancestors, go wallowing in the mire! But I did not come
      here to talk to you. I have given you up already." He went on in a choking
      voice, as he stood up: "I came here to find out where your sister is, you
      scoundrel! She left me after dinner. It is now past seven o'clock and she
      is not in. She has been going out lately without telling me, and she has
      been disrespectful—and I see your filthy, abominable influence at
      work. Where is she?"
    

      He had in his hands the familiar umbrella, and I was already taken aback,
      and I stood stiff and erect, like a schoolboy, waiting for my father to
      thrash me, but he saw the glance I cast at the umbrella and this probably
      checked him.
    

      "Live as you like!" he said. "My blessing is gone from you."
    

      "Good God!" muttered my old nurse behind the door. "You are lost. Oh! my
      heart feels some misfortune coming. I can feel it."
    

      I went to work on the railway. During the whole of August there was wind
      and rain. It was damp and cold; the corn had now been gathered in the
      fields, and on the big farms where the reaping was done with machines, the
      wheat lay not in stacks, but in heaps; and I remember how those melancholy
      heaps grew darker and darker every day, and the grain sprouted. It was
      hard work; the pouring rain spoiled everything that we succeeded in
      finishing. We were not allowed either to live or to sleep in the station
      buildings and had to take shelter in dirty, damp, mud huts where the
      "railies" had lived during the summer, and at night I could not sleep from
      the cold and the bugs crawling over my face and hands. And when we were
      working near the bridges, then the "railies" used to come out in a crowd
      to fight the painters—which they regarded as sport. They used to
      thrash us, steal our trousers, and to infuriate us and provoke us to a
      fight; they used to spoil our work, as when they smeared the signal-boxes
      with green paint. To add to all our miseries Radish began to pay us very
      irregularly. All the painting on the line was given to one contractor, who
      subcontracted with another, and he again with Radish, stipulating for
      twenty per cent commission. The job itself was unprofitable; then came the
      rains; time was wasted; we did no work and Radish had to pay his men every
      day. The starving painters nearly came to blows with him, called him a
      swindler, a bloodsucker, a Judas, and he, poor man, sighed and in despair
      raised his hands to the heavens and was continually going to Mrs.
      Cheprakov to borrow money.
    

      VII
    

      Came the rainy, muddy, dark autumn, bringing a slack time, and I used to
      sit at home three days in the week without work, or did various jobs
      outside painting; such as digging earth for ballast for twenty copecks a
      day. Doctor Blagovo had gone to Petersburg. My sister did not come to see
      me. Radish lay at home ill, expecting to die every day.
    

      And my mood was also autumnal; perhaps because when I became a working man
      I saw only the seamy side of the life of our town, and every day made
      fresh discoveries which brought me to despair. My fellow townsmen, both
      those of whom I had had a low opinion before, and those whom I had thought
      fairly decent, now seemed to me base, cruel, and up to any dirty trick. We
      poor people were tricked and cheated in the accounts, kept waiting for
      hours in cold passages or in the kitchen, and we were insulted and
      uncivilly treated. In the autumn I had to paper the library and two rooms
      at the club. I was paid seven copecks a piece, but was told to give a
      receipt for twelve copecks, and when I refused to do it, a respectable
      gentleman in gold spectacles, one of the stewards of the club, said to me:
    

      "If you say another word, you scoundrel, I'll knock you down."
    

      And when a servant whispered to him that I was the son of Pologniev, the
      architect, then I got flustered and blushed, but he recovered himself at
      once and said:
    

      "Damn him."
    

      In the shops we working men were sold bad meat, musty flour, and coarse
      tea. In church we were jostled by the police, and in the hospitals we were
      mulcted by the assistants and nurses, and if we could not give them bribes
      through poverty, we were given food in dirty dishes. In the post-office
      the lowest official considered it his duty to treat us as animals and to
      shout rudely and insolently: "Wait! Don't you come pushing your way in
      here!" Even the dogs, even they were hostile to us and hurled themselves
      at us with a peculiar malignancy. But what struck me most of all in my new
      position was the entire lack of justice, what the people call "forgetting
      God." Rarely a day went by without some swindle. The shopkeeper, who sold
      us oil, the contractor, the workmen, the customers themselves, all
      cheated. It was an understood thing that our rights were never considered,
      and we always had to pay for the money we had earned, going with our hats
      off to the back door.
    

      I was paper-hanging in one of the club-rooms, next the library, when, one
      evening as I was on the point of leaving, Dolyhikov's daughter came into
      the room carrying a bundle of books.
    

      I bowed to her.
    

      "Ah! How are you?" she said, recognising me at once and holding out her
      hand. "I am very glad to see you."
    

      She smiled and looked with a curious puzzled expression at my blouse and
      the pail of paste and the papers lying on the floor; I was embarrassed and
      she also felt awkward.
    

      "Excuse my staring at you," she said. "I have heard so much about you.
      Especially from Doctor Blagovo. He is enthusiastic about you. I have met
      your sister; she is a dear, sympathetic girl, but I could not make her see
      that there is nothing awful in your simple life. On the contrary, you are
      the most interesting man in the town."
    

      Once more she glanced at the pail of paste and the paper and said:
    

      "I asked Doctor Blagovo to bring us together, but he either forgot or had
      no time. However, we have met now. I should be very pleased if you would
      call on me. I do so want to have a talk. I am a simple person," she said,
      holding out her hand, "and I hope you will come and see me without
      ceremony. My father is away, in Petersburg."
    

      She went into the reading-room, with her dress rustling, and for a long
      time after I got home I could not sleep.
    

      During that autumn some kind soul, wishing to relieve my existence, sent
      me from time to time presents of tea and lemons, or biscuits, or roast
      pigeons. Karpovna said the presents were brought by a soldier, though from
      whom she did not know; and the soldier used to ask if I was well, if I had
      dinner every day, and if I had warm clothes. When the frost began the
      soldier came while I was out and brought a soft knitted scarf, which gave
      out a soft, hardly perceptible scent, and I guessed who my good fairy had
      been. For the scarf smelled of lily-of-the-valley, Aniuta Blagovo's
      favourite scent.
    

      Toward winter there was more work and things became more cheerful. Radish
      came to life again and we worked together in the cemetery church, where we
      scraped the holy shrine for gilding. It was a clean, quiet, and, as our
      mates said, a specially good job. We could do a great deal in one day, and
      so time passed quickly, imperceptibly. There was no swearing, nor
      laughing, nor loud altercations. The place compelled quiet and decency,
      and disposed one for tranquil, serious thoughts. Absorbed in our work, we
      stood or sat immovably, like statues; there was a dead silence, very
      proper to a cemetery, so that if a tool fell down, or the oil in the lamp
      spluttered, the sound would be loud and startling, and we would turn to
      see what it was. After a long silence one could hear a humming like that
      of a swarm of bees; in the porch, in an undertone, the funeral service was
      being read over a dead baby; or a painter painting a moon surrounded with
      stars on the cupola would begin to whistle quietly, and remembering
      suddenly that he was in a church, would stop; or Radish would sigh at his
      own thoughts: "Anything may happen! Anything may happen!" or above our
      heads there would be the slow, mournful tolling of a bell, and the
      painters would say it must be a rich man being brought to the church....
    

      The days I spent in the peace of the little church, and during the
      evenings I played billiards, or went to the gallery of the theatre in the
      new serge suit I had bought with my own hard-earned money. They were
      already beginning plays and concerts at the Azhoguins', and Radish did the
      scenery by himself. He told me about the plays and tableaux vivants at the
      Azhoguins', and I listened to him enviously. I had a great longing to take
      part in the rehearsals, but I dared not go to the Azhoguins'.
    

      A week before Christmas Doctor Blagovo arrived, and we resumed our
      arguments and played billiards in the evenings. When he played billiards
      he used to take off his coat, and unfasten his shirt at the neck, and
      generally try to look like a debauchee. He drank a little, but rowdily,
      and managed to spend in a cheap tavern like the Volga as much as twenty
      roubles in an evening.
    

      Once more my sister came to see me, and when they met they expressed
      surprise, but I could see by her happy, guilty face that these meetings
      were not accidental. One evening when we were playing billiards the doctor
      said to me:
    

      "I say, why don't you call on Miss Dolyhikov? You don't know Maria
      Victorovna. She is a clever, charming, simple creature."
    

      I told him how the engineer had received me in the spring.
    

      "Nonsense!" laughed the doctor. "The engineer is one thing and she is
      another. Really, my good fellow, you mustn't offend her. Go and see her
      some time. Let us go to-morrow evening. Will you?"
    

      He persuaded me. Next evening I donned my serge suit and with some
      perturbation set out to call on Miss Dolyhikov. The footman did not seem
      to me so haughty and formidable, or the furniture so oppressive, as on the
      morning when I had come to ask for work. Maria Victorovna was expecting me
      and greeted me as an old friend and gave my hand a warm, friendly grip.
      She was wearing a grey dress with wide sleeves, and had her hair done in
      the style which when it became the fashion a year later in our town, was
      called "dog's ears." The hair was combed back over the ears, and it made
      Maria Victorovna's face look broader, and she looked very like her father,
      whose face was broad and red and rather like a coachman's. She was
      handsome and elegant, but not young; about thirty to judge by her
      appearance, though she was not more than twenty-five.
    

      "Dear doctor!" she said, making me sit down. "How grateful I am to him.
      But for him, you would not have come. I am bored to death! My father has
      gone and left me alone, and I do not know what to do with myself."
    

      Then she began to ask where I was working, how much I got, and where I
      lived.
    

      "Do you only spend what you earn on yourself?" she asked.
    

      "Yes."
    

      "You are a happy man," she replied. "All the evil in life, it seems to me,
      comes from boredom and idleness, and spiritual emptiness, which are
      inevitable when one lives at other people's expense. Don't think I'm
      showing off. I mean it sincerely. It is dull and unpleasant to be rich.
      Win friends by just riches, they say, because as a rule there is and can
      be no such thing as just riches."
    

      She looked at the furniture with a serious, cold expression, as though she
      was making an inventory of it, and went on:
    

      "Ease and comfort possess a magic power. Little by little they seduce even
      strong-willed people. Father and I used to live poorly and simply, and now
      you see how we live. Isn't it strange?" she said with a shrug. "We spend
      twenty thousand roubles a year! In the provinces!"
    

      "Ease and comfort must not be regarded as the inevitable privilege of
      capital and education," I said. "It seems to me possible to unite the
      comforts of life with work, however hard and dirty it may be. Your father
      is rich, but, as he says, he used to be a mechanic, and just a
      lubricator."
    

      She smiled and shook her head thoughtfully.
    

      "Papa sometimes eats tiurya," she said, "but only out of caprice."
    

      A bell rang and she got up.
    

      "The rich and the educated ought to work like the rest," she went on, "and
      if there is to be any comfort, it should be accessible to all. There
      should be no privileges. However, that's enough philosophy. Tell me
      something cheerful. Tell me about the painters. What are they like?
      Funny?"
    

      The doctor came. I began to talk about the painters, but, being unused to
      it, I felt awkward and talked solemnly and ponderously like an
      ethnographist. The doctor also told a few stories about working people. He
      rocked to and fro and cried, and fell on his knees, and when he was
      depicting a drunkard, lay flat on the floor. It was as good as a play, and
      Maria Victorovna laughed until she cried. Then he played the piano and
      sang in his high-pitched tenor, and Maria Victorovna stood by him and told
      him what to sing and corrected him when he made a mistake.
    

      "I hear you sing, too," said I.
    

      "Too?" cried the doctor. "She is a wonderful singer, an artist, and you
      say—too! Careful, careful!"
    

      "I used to study seriously," she replied, "but I have given it up now."
    

      She sat on a low stool and told us about her life in Petersburg, and
      imitated famous singers, mimicking their voices and mannerisms; then she
      sketched the doctor and myself in her album, not very well, but both were
      good likenesses. She laughed and made jokes and funny faces, and this
      suited her better than talking about unjust riches, and it seemed to me
      that what she had said about "riches and comfort" came not from herself,
      but was just mimicry. She was an admirable comedian. I compared her
      mentally with the girls of our town, and not even the beautiful, serious
      Aniuta Blagovo could stand up against her; the difference was as vast as
      that between a wild and a garden rose.
    

      We stayed to supper. The doctor and Maria Victorovna drank red wine,
      champagne, and coffee with cognac; they touched glasses and drank to
      friendship, to wit, to progress, to freedom, and never got drunk, but went
      rather red and laughed for no reason until they cried. To avoid being out
      of it I, too, drank red wine.
    

      "People with talent and with gifted natures," said Miss Dolyhikov, "know
      how to live and go their own way; but ordinary people like myself know
      nothing and can do nothing by themselves; there is nothing for them but to
      find some deep social current and let themselves be borne along by it."
    

      "Is it possible to find that which does not exist?" asked the doctor.
    

      "It doesn't exist because we don't see it."
    

      "Is that so? Social currents are the invention of modern literature. They
      don't exist here."
    

      A discussion began.
    

      "We have no profound social movements; nor have we had them," said the
      doctor. "Modern literature has invented a lot of things, and modern
      literature invented intellectual working men in village life, but go
      through all our villages and you will only find Mr. Cheeky Snout in a
      jacket or black frock coat, who will make four mistakes in the word 'one.'
      Civilised life has not begun with us yet. We have the same savagery, the
      same slavery, the same nullity as we had five hundred years ago.
      Movements, currents—all that is so wretched and puerile mixed up
      with such vulgar, catch-penny interests—and one cannot take it
      seriously. You may think you have discovered a large social movement, and
      you may follow it and devote your life in the modern fashion to such
      problems as the liberation of vermin from slavery, or the abolition of
      meat cutlets—and I congratulate you, madam. But we have to learn,
      learn, learn, and there will be plenty of time for social movements; we
      are not up to them yet, and upon my soul, we don't understand anything at
      all about them."
    

      "You don't understand, but I do," said Maria Victorovna. "Good Heavens!
      What a bore you are to-night."
    

      "It is our business to learn and learn, to try and accumulate as much
      knowledge as possible, because serious social movements come where there
      is knowledge, and the future happiness of mankind lies in science. Here's
      to science!"
    

      "One thing is certain. Life must somehow be arranged differently," said
      Maria Victorovna, after some silence and deep thought, "and life as it has
      been up to now is worthless. Don't let us talk about it."
    

      When we left her the Cathedral clock struck two.
    

      "Did you like her?" asked the doctor. "Isn't she a dear girl?"
    

      We had dinner at Maria Victorovna's on Christmas Day, and then we went to
      see her every day during the holidays. There was nobody besides ourselves,
      and she was right when she said she had no friends in the town but the
      doctor and me. We spent most of the time talking, and sometimes the doctor
      would bring a book or a magazine and read aloud. After all, he was the
      first cultivated man I had met. I could not tell if he knew much, but he
      was always generous with his knowledge because he wished others to know
      too. When he talked about medicine, he was not like any of our local
      doctors, but he made a new and singular impression, and it seemed to me
      that if he had wished he could have become a genuine scientist. And
      perhaps he was the only person at that time who had any real influence
      over me. Meeting him and reading the books he gave me, I began gradually
      to feel a need for knowledge to inspire the tedium of my work. It seemed
      strange to me that I had not known before such things as that the whole
      world consisted of sixty elements. I did not know what oil or paint was,
      and I could do without knowing. My acquaintance with the doctor raised me
      morally too. I used to argue with him, and though I usually stuck to my
      opinion, yet, through him, I came gradually to perceive that everything
      was not clear to me, and I tried to cultivate convictions as definite as
      possible so that the promptings of my conscience should be precise and
      have nothing vague about them. Nevertheless, educated and fine as he was,
      far and away the best man in the town, he was by no means perfect. There
      was something rather rude and priggish in his ways and in his trick of
      dragging talk down to discussion, and when he took off his coat and sat in
      his shirt and gave the footman a tip, it always seemed to me that culture
      was just a part of him, with the rest untamed Tartar.
    

      After the holidays he left once more for Petersburg. He went in the
      morning and after dinner my sister came to see me. Without taking off her
      furs, she sat silent, very pale, staring in front of her. She began to
      shiver and seemed to be fighting against some illness.
    

      "You must have caught a cold," I said.
    

      Her eyes filled with tears. She rose and went to Karpovna without a word
      to me, as though I had offended her. And a little later I heard her
      speaking in a tone of bitter reproach.
    

      "Nurse, what have I been living for, up to now? What for? Tell me; haven't
      I wasted my youth? During the last years I have had nothing but making up
      accounts, pouring out tea, counting the copecks, entertaining guests,
      without a thought that there was anything better in the world! Nurse, try
      to understand me, I too have human desires and I want to live and they
      have made a housekeeper of me. It is awful, awful!"
    

      She flung her keys against the door and they fell with a clatter in my
      room. They were the keys of the side-board, the larder, the cellar, and
      the tea-chest—the keys my mother used to carry.
    

      "Oh! Oh! Saints above!" cried my old nurse in terror. "The blessed
      saints!"
    

      When she left, my sister came into my room for her keys and said:
    

      "Forgive me. Something strange has been going on in me lately."
    

      VIII
    

      One evening when I came home late from Maria Victorovna's I found a young
      policeman in a new uniform in my room; he was sitting by the table
      reading.
    

      "At last!" he said getting up and stretching himself. "This is the third
      time I have been to see you. The governor has ordered you to go and see
      him to-morrow at nine o'clock sharp. Don't be late."
    

      He made me give him a written promise to comply with his Excellency's
      orders and went away. This policeman's visit and the unexpected invitation
      to see the governor had a most depressing effect on me. From my early
      childhood I have had a dread of gendarmes, police, legal officials, and I
      was tormented with anxiety as though I had really committed a crime and I
      could not sleep. Nurse and Prokofyi were also upset and could not sleep.
      And, to make things worse, nurse had an earache, and moaned and more than
      once screamed out. Hearing that I could not sleep Prokofyi came quietly
      into my room with a little lamp and sat by the table.
    

      "You should have a drop of pepper-brandy...." he said after some thought.
      "In this vale of tears things go on all right when you take a drop. And if
      mother had some pepper-brandy poured into her ear she would be much
      better."
    

      About three he got ready to go to the slaughter-house to fetch some meat.
      I knew I should not sleep until morning, and to use up the time until
      nine, I went with him. We walked with a lantern, and his boy, Nicolka, who
      was about thirteen, and had blue spots on his face and an expression like
      a murderer's, drove behind us in a sledge, urging the horse on with hoarse
      cries.
    

      "You will probably be punished at the governor's," said Prokofyi as we
      walked. "There is a governor's rank, and an archimandrite's rank, and an
      officer's rank, and a doctor's rank, and every profession has its own
      rank. You don't keep to yours and they won't allow it."
    

      The slaughter-house stood behind the cemetery, and till then I had only
      seen it at a distance. It consisted of three dark sheds surrounded by a
      grey fence, from which, when the wind was in that direction in summer,
      there came an overpowering stench. Now, as I entered the yard, I could not
      see the sheds in the darkness; I groped through horses and sledges, both
      empty and laden with meat; and there were men walking about with lanterns
      and swearing disgustingly. Prokofyi and Nicolka swore as filthily and
      there was a continuous hum from the swearing and coughing and the neighing
      of the horses.
    

      The place smelled of corpses and offal, the snow was thawing and already
      mixed with mud, and in the darkness it seemed to me that I was walking
      through a pool of blood.
    

      When we had filled the sledge with meat, we went to the butcher's shop in
      the market-place. Day was beginning to dawn. One after another the cooks
      came with baskets and old women in mantles. With an axe in his hand,
      wearing a white, blood-stained apron, Prokofyi swore terrifically and
      crossed himself, turning toward the church, and shouted so loud that he
      could be heard all over the market, avowing that he sold his meat at cost
      price and even at a loss. He cheated in weighing and reckoning, the cooks
      saw it, but, dazed by his shouting, they did not protest, but only called
      him a gallows-bird.
    

      Raising and dropping his formidable axe, he assumed picturesque attitudes
      and constantly uttered the sound "Hak!" with a furious expression, and I
      was really afraid of his cutting off some one's head or hand.
    

      I stayed in the butcher's shop the whole morning, and when at last I went
      to the governor's my fur coat smelled of meat and blood. My state of mind
      would have been appropriate for an encounter with a bear armed with no
      more than a staff. I remember a long staircase with a striped carpet, and
      a young official in a frock coat with shining buttons, who silently
      indicated the door with both hands and went in to announce me. I entered
      the hall, where the furniture was most luxurious, but cold and tasteless,
      forming a most unpleasant impression—the tall, narrow pier-glasses,
      and the bright, yellow hangings over the windows; one could see that,
      though governors changed, the furniture remained the same. The young
      official again pointed with both hands to the door and went toward a
      large, green table, by which stood a general with the Order of Vladimir at
      his neck.
    

      "Mr. Pologniev," he began, holding a letter in his hand and opening his
      mouth wide so that it made a round O. "I asked you to come to say this to
      you: 'Your esteemed father has applied verbally and in writing to the
      provincial marshal of nobility, to have you summoned and made to see the
      incongruity of your conduct with the title of nobleman which you have the
      honour to bear. His Excellency Alexander Pavlovich, justly thinking that
      your conduct may be subversive, and finding that persuasion may not be
      sufficient, without serious intervention on the part of the authorities,
      has given me his decision as to your case, and I agree with him.'"
    

      He said this quietly, respectfully, standing erect as if I was his
      superior, and his expression was not at all severe. He had a flabby, tired
      face, covered with wrinkles, with pouches under his eyes; his hair was
      dyed, and it was hard to guess his age from his appearance—fifty or
      sixty.
    

      "I hope," he went on, "that you will appreciate Alexander Pavlovich's
      delicacy in applying to me, not officially, but privately. I have invited
      you unofficially not as a governor, but as a sincere admirer of your
      father's. And I ask you to change your conduct and to return to the duties
      proper to your rank, or, to avoid the evil effects of your example, to go
      to some other place where you are not known and where you may do what you
      like. Otherwise I shall have to resort to extreme measures."
    

      For half a minute he stood in silence staring at me open-mouthed.
    

      "Are you a vegetarian?" he asked.
    

      "No, your Excellency, I eat meat."
    

      He sat down and took up a document, and I bowed and left.
    

      It was not worth while going to work before dinner. I went home and tried
      to sleep, but could not because of the unpleasant, sickly feeling from the
      slaughter-house and my conversation with the governor. And so I dragged
      through till the evening and then, feeling gloomy and out of sorts, I went
      to see Maria Victorovna. I told her about my visit to the governor and she
      looked at me in bewilderment, as if she did not believe me, and suddenly
      she began to laugh merrily, heartily, stridently, as only good-natured,
      light-hearted people can.
    

      "If I were to tell this in Petersburg!" she cried, nearly dropping with
      laughter, bending over the table. "If I could tell them in Petersburg!"
    

      IX
    

      Now we saw each other often, sometimes twice a day. Almost every day,
      after dinner, she drove up to the cemetery and, as she waited for me, read
      the inscriptions on the crosses and monuments. Sometimes she came into the
      church and stood by my side and watched me working. The silence, the
      simple industry of the painters and gilders, Radish's good sense, and the
      fact that outwardly I was no different from the other artisans and worked
      as they did, in a waistcoat and old shoes, and that they addressed me
      familiarly—were new to her, and she was moved by it all. Once in her
      presence a painter who was working, at a door on the roof, called down to
      me:
    

      "Misail, fetch me the white lead."
    

      I fetched him the white lead and as I came down the scaffolding she was
      moved to tears and looked at me and smiled:
    

      "What a dear you are!" she said.
    

      I have always remembered how when I was a child a green parrot got out of
      its cage in one of the rich people's houses and wandered about the town
      for a whole month, flying from one garden to another, homeless and lonely.
      And Maria Victorovna reminded me of the bird.
    

      "Except to the cemetery," she said with a laugh, "I have absolutely
      nowhere to go. The town bores me to tears. People read, sing, and twitter
      at the Azhoguins', but I cannot bear them lately. Your sister is shy, Miss
      Blagovo for some reason hates me. I don't like the theatre. What can I do
      with myself?"
    

      When I was at her house I smelled of paint and turpentine, and my hands
      were stained. She liked that. She wanted me to come to her in my ordinary
      working-clothes; but I felt awkward in them in her drawing-room, and as if
      I were in uniform, and so I always wore my new serge suit. She did not
      like that.
    

      "You must confess," she said once, "that you have not got used to your new
      rôle. A working-man's suit makes you feel awkward and embarrassed.
      Tell me, isn't it because you are not sure of yourself and are
      unsatisfied? Does this work you have chosen, this painting of yours,
      really satisfy you?" she asked merrily. "I know paint makes things look
      nicer and wear better, but the things themselves belong to the rich and
      after all they are a luxury. Besides you have said more than once that
      everybody should earn his living with his own hands and you earn money,
      not bread. Why don't you keep to the exact meaning of what you say? You
      must earn bread, real bread, you must plough, sow, reap, thrash, or do
      something which has to do directly with agriculture, such as keeping cows,
      digging, or building houses...."
    

      She opened a handsome bookcase which stood by the writing-table and said:
    

      "I'm telling you all this because I'm going to let you into my secret.
      Voilà. This is my agricultural library. Here are books on arable
      land, vegetable-gardens, orchard-keeping, cattle-keeping, bee-keeping: I
      read them eagerly and have studied the theory of everything thoroughly. It
      is my dream to go to Dubechnia as soon as March begins. It is wonderful
      there, amazing; isn't it? The first year I shall only be learning the work
      and getting used to it, and in the second year I shall begin to work
      thoroughly, without sparing myself. My father promised to give me
      Dubechnia as a present, and I am to do anything I like with it."
    

      She blushed and with mingled laughter and tears she dreamed aloud of her
      life at Dubechnia and how absorbing it would be. And I envied her. March
      would soon be here. The days were drawing out, and in the bright sunny
      afternoons the snow dripped from the roofs, and the smell of spring was in
      the air. I too longed for the country.
    

      And when she said she was going to live at Dubechnia, I saw at once that I
      should be left alone in the town, and I felt jealous of the bookcase with
      her books about farming. I knew and cared nothing about farming and I was
      on the point of telling her that agriculture was work for slaves, but I
      recollected that my father had once said something of the sort and I held
      my peace.
    

      Lent began. The engineer, Victor Ivanich, came home from Petersburg. I had
      begun to forget his existence. He came unexpectedly, not even sending a
      telegram. When I went there as usual in the evening, he was walking up and
      down the drawing-room, after a bath, with his hair cut, looking ten years
      younger, and talking. His daughter was kneeling by his trunks and taking
      out boxes, bottles, books, and handing them to Pavel the footman. When I
      saw the engineer, I involuntarily stepped back and he held out both his
      hands and smiled and showed his strong, white, cab-driver's teeth.
    

      "Here he is! Here he is! I'm very pleased to see you, Mr. House-painter!
      Maria told me all about you and sang your praises. I quite understand you
      and heartily approve." He took me by the arm and went on: "It is much
      cleverer and more honest to be a decent workman than to spoil State paper
      and to wear a cockade. I myself worked with my hands in Belgium. I was an
      engine-driver for five years...."
    

      He was wearing a short jacket and comfortable slippers, and he shuffled
      along like a gouty man waving and rubbing his hands; humming and buzzing
      and shrugging with pleasure at being at home again with his favourite
      shower-bath.
    

      "There's no denying," he said at supper, "there's no denying that you are
      kind, sympathetic people, but somehow as soon as you gentlefolk take on
      manual labour or try to spare the peasants, you reduce it all to
      sectarianism. You are a sectarian. You don't drink vodka. What is that but
      sectarianism?"
    

      To please him I drank vodka. I drank wine, too. We ate cheese, sausages,
      pastries, pickles, and all kinds of dainties that the engineer had brought
      with him, and we sampled wines sent from abroad during his absence. They
      were excellent. For some reason the engineer had wines and cigars sent
      from abroad—duty free; somebody sent him caviare and baliki
      gratis; he did not pay rent for his house because his landlord supplied
      the railway with kerosene, and generally he and his daughter gave me the
      impression of having all the best things in the world at their service
      free of charge.
    

      I went on visiting them, but with less pleasure than before. The engineer
      oppressed me and I felt cramped in his presence. I could not endure his
      clear, innocent eyes; his opinions bored me and were offensive to me, and
      I was distressed by the recollection that I had so recently been
      subordinate to this ruddy, well-fed man, and that he had been mercilessly
      rude to me. True he would put his arm round my waist and clap me kindly on
      the shoulder and approve of my way of living, but I felt that he despised
      my nullity just as much as before and only suffered me to please his
      daughter, but I could no longer laugh and talk easily, and I thought
      myself ill-mannered, and all the time was expecting him to call me
      Panteley as he did his footman Pavel. How my provincial, bourgeois pride
      rode up against him! I, a working man, a painter, going every day to the
      house of rich strangers, whom the whole town regarded as foreigners, and
      drinking their expensive wines and outlandish dishes! I could not
      reconcile this with my conscience. When I went to see them I sternly
      avoided those whom I met on the way, and looked askance at them like a
      real sectarian, and when I left the engineer's house I was ashamed of
      feeling so well-fed.
    

      But chiefly I was afraid of falling in love. Whether walking in the
      street, or working, or talking to my mates, I thought all the time of
      going to Maria Victorovna's in the evening, and always had her voice, her
      laughter, her movements with me. And always as I got ready to go to her, I
      would stand for a long time in front of the cracked mirror tying my
      necktie; my serge suit seemed horrible to me, and I suffered, but at the
      same time, despised myself for feeling so small. When she called to me
      from another room to say that she was not dressed yet and to ask me to
      wait a bit, and I could hear her dressing, I was agitated and felt as
      though the floor was sinking under me. And when I saw a woman in the
      street, even at a distance, I fell to comparing her figure with hers, and
      it seemed to me that all our women and girls were vulgar, absurdly
      dressed, and without manners; and such comparisons roused in me a feeling
      of pride; Maria Victorovna was better than all of them. And at night I
      dreamed of her and myself.
    

      Once at supper the engineer and I ate a whole lobster. When I reached home
      I remember that the engineer had twice called me "my dear fellow," and I
      thought that they treated me as they might have done a big, unhappy dog,
      separated from his master, and that they were amusing themselves with me,
      and that they would order me away like a dog when they were bored with me.
      I began to feel ashamed and hurt; went to the point of tears, as though I
      had been insulted, and, raising my eyes to the heavens, I vowed to put an
      end to it all.
    

      Next day I did not go to the Dolyhikovs'. Late at night, when it was quite
      dark and pouring with rain, I walked up and down Great Gentry Street,
      looking at the windows. At the Azhoguins' everybody was asleep and the
      only light was in one of the top windows; old Mrs. Azhoguin was sitting in
      her room embroidering by candle-light and imagining herself to be fighting
      against prejudice. It was dark in our house and opposite, at the
      Dolyhikovs' the windows were lit up, but it was impossible to see anything
      through the flowers and curtains. I kept on walking up and down the
      street; I was soaked through with the cold March rain. I heard my father
      come home from the club; he knocked at the door; in a minute a light
      appeared at a window and I saw my sister walking quickly with her lamp and
      hurriedly arranging her thick hair. Then my father paced up and down the
      drawing-room, talking and rubbing his hands, and my sister sat still in a
      corner, lost in thought, not listening to him....
    

      But soon they left the room and the light was put out.... I looked at the
      engineer's house and that too was now dark. In the darkness and the rain I
      felt desperately lonely. Cast out at the mercy of Fate, and I felt how,
      compared with my loneliness, and my suffering, actual and to come, all my
      work and all my desires and all that I had hitherto thought and read, were
      vain and futile. Alas! The activities and thoughts of human beings are not
      nearly so important as their sorrows! And not knowing exactly what I was
      doing I pulled with all my might at the bell at the Dolyhikovs' gate,
      broke it, and ran away down the street like a little boy, full of fear,
      thinking they would rush out at once and recognise me. When I stopped to
      take breath at the end of the street, I could hear nothing but the falling
      rain and far away a night-watchman knocking on a sheet of iron.
    

      For a whole week I did not go to the Dolyhikovs'. I sold my serge suit. I
      had no work and I was once more half-starved, earning ten or twenty
      copecks a day, when possible, by disagreeable work. Floundering knee-deep
      in the mire, putting out all my strength, I tried to drown my memories and
      to punish myself for all the cheeses and pickles to which I had been
      treated at the engineer's. Still, no sooner did I go to bed, wet and
      hungry, than my untamed imagination set to work to evolve wonderful,
      alluring pictures, and to my amazement I confessed that I was in love,
      passionately in love, and I fell sound asleep feeling that the hard life
      had only made my body stronger and younger.
    

      One evening it began, most unseasonably, to snow, and the wind blew from
      the north, exactly as if winter had begun again. When I got home from work
      I found Maria Victorovna in my room. She was in her furs with her hands in
      her muff.
    

      "Why don't you come to see me?" she asked, looking at me with her bright
      sagacious eyes, and I was overcome with joy and stood stiffly in front of
      her, just as I had done with my father when he was going to thrash me; she
      looked straight into my face and I could see by her eyes that she
      understood why I was overcome.
    

      "Why don't you come to see me?" she repeated. "You don't want to come? I
      had to come to you."
    

      She got up and came close to me.
    

      "Don't leave me," she said, and her eyes filled with tears. "I am lonely,
      utterly lonely."
    

      She began to cry and said, covering her face with her muff:
    

      "Alone! Life is hard, very hard, and in the whole world I have no one but
      you. Don't leave me!"
    

      Looking for her handkerchief to dry her tears, she gave a smile; we were
      silent for some time, then I embraced and kissed her, and the pin in her
      hat scratched my face and drew blood.
    

      And we began to talk as though we had been dear to each other for a long,
      long time.
    

      X
    

      In a couple of days she sent me to Dubechnia and I was beyond words
      delighted with it. As I walked to the station, and as I sat in the train,
      I laughed for no reason and people thought me drunk. There were snow and
      frost in the mornings still, but the roads were getting dark, and there
      were rooks cawing above them.
    

      At first I thought of arranging the side wing opposite Mrs. Cheprakov's
      for myself and Masha, but it appeared that doves and pigeons had taken up
      their abode there and it would be impossible to cleanse it without
      destroying a great number of nests. We would have to live willy-nilly in
      the uncomfortable rooms with Venetian blinds in the big house. The
      peasants called it a palace; there were more than twenty rooms in it, and
      the only furniture was a piano and a child's chair, lying in the attic,
      and even if Masha brought all her furniture from town we should not
      succeed in removing the impression of frigid emptiness and coldness. I
      chose three small rooms with windows looking on to the garden, and from
      early morning till late at night I was at work in them, glazing the
      windows, hanging paper, blocking up the chinks and holes in the floor. It
      was an easy, pleasant job. Every now and then I would run to the river to
      see if the ice was breaking and all the while I dreamed of the starlings
      returning. And at night when I thought of Masha I would be filled with an
      inexpressibly sweet feeling of an all-embracing joy to listen to the rats
      and the wind rattling and knocking above the ceiling; it was like an old
      hobgoblin coughing in the attic.
    

      The snow was deep; there was a heavy fall at the end of March, but it
      thawed rapidly, as if by magic, and the spring floods rushed down so that
      by the beginning of April the starlings were already chattering and yellow
      butterflies fluttered in the garden. The weather was wonderful. Every day
      toward evening I walked toward the town to meet Masha, and how delightful
      it was to walk along the soft, drying road with bare feet! Half-way I
      would sit down and look at the town, not daring to go nearer. The sight of
      it upset me, I was always wondering how my acquaintances would behave
      toward me when they heard of my love. What would my father say? I was
      particularly worried by the idea that my life was becoming more
      complicated, and that I had entirely lost control of it, and that she was
      carrying me off like a balloon, God knows whither. I had already given up
      thinking how to make a living, and I thought—indeed, I cannot
      remember what I thought.
    

      Masha used to come in a carriage. I would take a seat beside her and
      together, happy and free, we used to drive to Dubechnia. Or, having waited
      till sunset, I would return home, weary and disconsolate, wondering why
      Masha had not come, and then by the gate or in the garden I would find my
      darling. She would come by the railway and walk over from the station.
      What a triumph she had then! In her plain, woollen dress, with a simple
      umbrella, but keeping a trim, fashionable figure and expensive, Parisian
      boots—she was a gifted actress playing the country girl. We used to
      go over the house, and plan out the rooms, and the paths, and the
      vegetable-garden, and the beehives. We already had chickens and ducks and
      geese which we loved because they were ours. We had oats, clover,
      buckwheat, and vegetable seeds all ready for sowing, and we used to
      examine them all and wonder what the crops would be like, and everything
      Masha said to me seemed extraordinarily clever and fine. This was the
      happiest time of my life.
    

      Soon after Easter we were married in the parish church in the village of
      Kurilovka three miles from Dubechnia. Masha wanted everything to be
      simple; by her wish our bridesmen were peasant boys, only one deacon sang,
      and we returned from the church in a little, shaky cart which she drove
      herself. My sister was the only guest from the town. Masha had sent her a
      note a couple of days before the wedding. My sister wore a white dress and
      white gloves.... During the ceremony she cried softly for joy and emotion,
      and her face had a maternal expression of infinite goodness. She was
      intoxicated with our happiness and smiled as though she were breathing a
      sweet perfume, and when I looked at her I understood that there was
      nothing in the world higher in her eyes than love, earthly love, and that
      she was always dreaming of love, secretly, timidly, yet passionately. She
      embraced Masha and kissed her, and, not knowing how to express her
      ecstasy, she said to her of me:
    

      "He is a good man! A very good man."
    

      Before she left us, she put on her ordinary clothes, and took me into the
      garden to have a quiet talk.
    

      "Father is very hurt that you have not written to him," she said. "You
      should have asked for his blessing. But, at heart, he is very pleased. He
      says that this marriage will raise you in the eyes of society, and that
      under Maria Victorovna's influence you will begin to adopt a more serious
      attitude toward life. In the evening now we talk about nothing but you;
      and yesterday he even said, 'our Misail.' I was delighted. He has
      evidently thought of a plan and I believe he wants to set you an example
      of magnanimity, and that he will be the first to talk of reconciliation.
      It is quite possible that one of these days he will come and see you
      here."
    

      She made the sign of the cross over me and said:
    

      "Well, God bless you. Be happy. Aniuta Blagovo is a very clever girl. She
      says of your marriage that God has sent you a new ordeal. Well? Married
      life is not made up only of joy but of suffering as well. It is impossible
      to avoid it."
    

      Masha and I walked about three miles with her, and then walked home
      quietly and silently, as though it were a rest for both of us. Masha had
      her hand on my arm. We were at peace and there was no need to talk of
      love; after the wedding we grew closer to each other and dearer, and it
      seemed as though nothing could part us.
    

      "Your sister is a dear, lovable creature," said Masha, "but looks as
      though she had lived in torture. Your father must be a terrible man."
    

      I began to tell her how my sister and I had been brought up and how absurd
      and full of torture our childhood had been. When she heard that my father
      had thrashed me quite recently she shuddered and clung to me:
    

      "Don't tell me any more," she said. "It is too horrible."
    

      And now she did not leave me. We lived in the big house, in three rooms,
      and in the evenings we bolted the door that led to the empty part of the
      house, as though some one lived there whom we did not know and feared. I
      used to get up early, at dawn, and begin working. I repaired the carts;
      made paths in the garden, dug the beds, painted the roofs. When the time
      came to sow oats, I tried to plough and harrow, and sow and did it all
      conscientiously, and did not leave it all to the labourer. I used to get
      tired, and my face and feet used to burn with the rain and the sharp cold
      wind. But work in the fields did not attract me. I knew nothing about
      agriculture and did not like it; perhaps because my ancestors were not
      tillers of the soil and pure town blood ran in my veins. I loved nature
      dearly; I loved the fields and the meadows and the garden, but the peasant
      who turns the earth with his plough, shouting at his miserable horse,
      ragged and wet, with bowed shoulders, was to me an expression of wild,
      rude, ugly force, and as I watched his clumsy movements I could not help
      thinking of the long-passed legendary life, when men did not yet know the
      use of fire. The fierce bull which led the herd, and the horses that
      stampeded through the village, filled me with terror, and all the large
      creatures, strong and hostile, a ram with horns, a gander, or a watch-dog
      seemed to me to be symbolical of some rough, wild force. These prejudices
      used to be particularly strong in me in bad weather, when heavy clouds
      hung over the black plough-lands. But worst of all was that when I was
      ploughing or sowing, and a few peasants stood and watched how I did it, I
      no longer felt the inevitability and necessity of the work and it seemed
      to me that I was trifling my time away.
    

      I used to go through the gardens and the meadow to the mill. It was leased
      by Stiepan, a Kurilovka peasant; handsome, swarthy, with a black beard—an
      athletic appearance. He did not care for mill work and thought it tiresome
      and unprofitable, and he only lived at the mill to escape from home. He
      was a saddler and always smelled of tan and leather. He did not like
      talking, was slow and immovable, and used to hum "U-lu-lu-lu," sitting on
      the bank or in the doorway of the mill. Sometimes his wife and
      mother-in-law used to come from Kurilovka to see him; they were both fair,
      languid, soft, and they used to bow to him humbly and call him Stiepan
      Petrovich. And he would not answer their greeting with a word or a sign,
      but would turn where he sat on the bank and hum quietly: "U-lu-lu-lu."
      There would be a silence for an hour or two. His mother-in-law and his
      wife would whisper to each other, get up and look expectantly at him for
      some time, waiting for him to look at them, and then they would bow humbly
      and say in sweet, soft voices:
    

      "Good-bye, Stiepan Petrovich."
    

      And they would go away. After that, Stiepan would put away the bundle of
      cracknels or the shirt they had left for him and sigh and give a wink in
      their direction and say:
    

      "The female sex!"
    

      The mill was worked with both wheels day and night. I used to help
      Stiepan, I liked it, and when he went away I was glad to take his place.
    

      XI
    

      After a spell of warm bright weather we had a season of bad roads. It
      rained and was cold all through May. The grinding of the millstones and
      the drip of the rain induced idleness and sleep. The floor shook, the
      whole place smelled of flour, and this too made one drowsy. My wife in a
      short fur coat and high rubber boots used to appear twice a day and she
      always said the same thing:
    

      "Call this summer! It is worse than October!"
    

      We used to have tea together and cook porridge, or sit together for hours
      in silence thinking the rain would never stop. Once when Stiepan went away
      to a fair, Masha stayed the night in the mill. When we got up we could not
      tell what time it was for the sky was overcast; the sleepy cocks at
      Dubechnia were crowing, and the corncrakes were trilling in the meadow; it
      was very, very early.... My wife and I walked down to the pool and drew up
      the bow-net that Stiepan had put out in our presence the day before. There
      was one large perch in it and a crayfish angrily stretched out his claws.
    

      "Let them go," said Masha. "Let them be happy too."
    

      Because we got up very early and had nothing to do, the day seemed very
      long, the longest in my life. Stiepan returned before dusk and I went back
      to the farmhouse.
    

      "Your father came here to-day," said Masha.
    

      "Where is he?"
    

      "He has gone. I did not receive him."
    

      Seeing my silence and feeling that I was sorry for my father, she said:
    

      "We must be logical. I did not receive him and sent a message to ask him
      not to trouble us again and not to come and see us."
    

      In a moment I was outside the gates, striding toward the town to make it
      up with my father. It was muddy, slippery, cold. For the first time since
      our marriage I suddenly felt sad, and through my brain, tired with the
      long day, there flashed the thought that perhaps I was not living as I
      ought; I got more and more tired and was gradually overcome with weakness,
      inertia; I had no desire to move or to think, and after walking for some
      time, I waved my hand and went home.
    

      In the middle of the yard stood the engineer in a leather coat with a
      hood. He was shouting:
    

      "Where's the furniture? There was some good Empire furniture, pictures,
      vases. There's nothing left! Damn it, I bought the place with the
      furniture!"
    

      Near him stood Moissey, Mrs. Cheprakov's bailiff, fumbling with his cap; a
      lank fellow of about twenty-five, with a spotty face and little, impudent
      eyes; one side of his face was larger than the other as though he had been
      lain on.
    

      "Yes, Right Honourable Sir, you bought it without the furniture," he said
      sheepishly. "I remember that clearly."
    

      "Silence!" shouted the engineer, going red in the face, and beginning to
      shake, and his shout echoed through the garden.
    

      XII
    

      When I was busy in the garden or the yard, Moissey would stand with his
      hands behind his back and stare at me impertinently with his little eyes.
      And this used to irritate me to such an extent that I would put aside my
      work and go away.
    

      We learned from Stiepan that Moissey had been Mrs. Cheprakov's lover. I
      noticed that when people went to her for money they used to apply to
      Moissey first, and once I saw a peasant, a charcoal-burner, black all
      over, grovel at his feet. Sometimes after a whispered conversation Moissey
      would hand over the money himself without saying anything to his mistress,
      from which I concluded that the transaction was settled on his own
      account.
    

      He used to shoot in our garden, under our very windows, steal food from
      our larder, borrow our horses without leave, and we were furious, feeling
      that Dubechnia was no longer ours, and Masha used to go pale and say:
    

      "Have we to live another year and a half with these creatures?"
    

      Ivan Cheprakov, the son, was a guard on the railway. During the winter he
      got very thin and weak, so that he got drunk on one glass of vodka, and
      felt cold out of the sun. He hated wearing his guard's uniform and was
      ashamed of it, but found his job profitable because he could steal candles
      and sell them. My new position gave him a mixed feeling of astonishment,
      envy, and vague hope that something of the sort might happen to him. He
      used to follow Masha with admiring eyes, and to ask me what I had for
      dinner nowadays, and his ugly, emaciated face used to wear a sweet, sad
      expression, and he used to twitch his fingers as though he could feel my
      happiness with them.
    

      "I say, Little Profit," he would say excitedly, lighting and relighting
      his cigarette; he always made a mess wherever he stood because he used to
      waste a whole box of matches on one cigarette. "I say, my life is about as
      beastly as it could be. Every little squirt of a soldier can shout: 'Here
      guard! Here!' I have such a lot in the trains and you know, mine's a
      rotten life! My mother has ruined me! I heard a doctor say in the train,
      if the parents are loose, their children become drunkards or criminals.
      That's it."
    

      Once he came staggering into the yard. His eyes wandered aimlessly and he
      breathed heavily; he laughed and cried, and said something in a kind of
      frenzy, and through his thickly uttered words I could only hear: "My
      mother? Where is my mother?" and he wailed like a child crying, because it
      has lost its mother in a crowd. I led him away into the garden and laid
      him down under a tree, and all that day and through the night Masha and I
      took it in turns to stay with him. He was sick and Masha looked with
      disgust at his pale, wet face and said:
    

      "Are we to have these creatures on the place for another year and a half?
      It is awful! Awful!"
    

      And what a lot of trouble the peasants gave us! How many disappointments
      we had at the outset, in the spring, when we so longed to be happy! My
      wife built a school. I designed the school for sixty boys, and the Zemstvo
      Council approved the design, but recommended our building the school at
      Kurilovka, the big village, only three miles away; besides the Kurilovka
      school, where the children of four villages, including that of Dubechnia,
      were taught, was old and inadequate and the floor was so rotten that the
      children were afraid to walk on it. At the end of March Masha, by her own
      desire, was appointed trustee of the Kurilovka school, and at the
      beginning of April we called three parish meetings and persuaded the
      peasants that the school was old and inadequate, and that it was necessary
      to build a new one. A member of the Zemstvo Council and the elementary
      school inspector came down too and addressed them. After each meeting we
      were mobbed and asked for a pail of vodka; we felt stifled in the crowd
      and soon got tired and returned home dissatisfied and rather abashed. At
      last the peasants allotted a site for the school and undertook to cart the
      materials from the town. And as soon as the spring corn was sown, on the
      very first Sunday, carts set out from Kurilovka and Dubechnia to fetch the
      bricks for the foundations. They went at dawn and returned late in the
      evening. The peasants were drunk and said they were tired out.
    

      The rain and the cold continued, as though deliberately, all through May.
      The roads were spoiled and deep in mud. When the carts came from town they
      usually drove to our horror, into our yard! A horse would appear in the
      gate, straddling its fore legs, with its big belly heaving; before it came
      into the yard it would strain and heave and after it would come a ten-yard
      beam in a four-wheeled wagon, wet and slimy; alongside it, wrapped up to
      keep the rain out, never looking where he was going and splashing through
      the puddles, a peasant would walk with the skirt of his coat tucked up in
      his belt. Another cart would appear with planks; then a third with a beam;
      then a fourth ... and the yard in front of the house would gradually be
      blocked up with horses, beams, planks. Peasants, men and women with their
      heads wrapped up and their skirts tucked up, would stare morosely at our
      windows, kick up a row and insist on the lady of the house coming out to
      them; and they would curse and swear. And in a corner Moissey would stand,
      and it seemed to us that he delighted in our discomfiture.
    

      "We won't cart any more!" the peasants shouted. "We are tired to death!
      Let her go and cart it herself!"
    

      Pale and scared, thinking they would any minute break into the house,
      Masha would send them money for a pail of vodka; after which the noise
      would die down and the long beams would go jolting out of the yard.
    

      When I went to look at the building my wife would get agitated and say:
    

      "The peasants are furious. They might do something to you. No. Wait. I'll
      go with you."
    

      We used to drive over to Kurilovka together and then the carpenters would
      ask for tips. The framework was ready for the foundations to be laid, but
      the masons never came and when at last the masons did come it was apparent
      that there was no sand; somehow it had been forgotten that sand was
      wanted. Taking advantage of our helplessness, the peasants asked thirty
      copecks a load, although it was less than a quarter of a mile from the
      building to the river where the sand was to be fetched, and more than five
      hundred loads were needed. There were endless misunderstandings, wrangles,
      and continual begging. My wife was indignant and the building contractor,
      Petrov, an old man of seventy, took her by the hand and said:
    

      "You look here! Look here! Just get me sand and I'll find ten men and have
      the work done in two days. Look here!"
    

      Sand was brought, but two, four days, a week passed and still there yawned
      a ditch where the foundations were to be.
    

      "I shall go mad," cried my wife furiously. "What wretches they are! What
      wretches!"
    

      During these disturbances Victor Ivanich used to come and see us. He used
      to bring hampers of wine and dainties, and eat for a long time, and then
      go to sleep on the terrace and snore so that the labourers shook their
      heads and said:
    

      "He's all right!"
    

      Masha took no pleasure in his visits. She did not believe in him, and yet
      she used to ask his advice; when, after a sound sleep after dinner, he got
      up out of humour, and spoke disparagingly of our domestic arrangements,
      and said he was sorry he had ever bought Dubechnia which had cost him so
      much, and poor Masha looked miserably anxious and complained to him, he
      would yawn and say the peasants ought to be flogged.
    

      He called our marriage and the life we were living a comedy, and used to
      say it was a caprice, a whimsy.
    

      "She did the same sort of thing once before," he told me. "She fancied
      herself as an opera singer, and ran away from me. It took me two months to
      find her, and my dear fellow, I wasted a thousand roubles on telegrams
      alone."
    

      He had dropped calling me a sectarian or the House-painter; and no longer
      approved of my life as a working man, but he used to say:
    

      "You are a queer fish! An abnormality. I don't venture to prophesy, but
      you will end badly!"
    

      Masha slept poorly at nights and would sit by the window of our bedroom
      thinking. She no longer laughed and made faces at supper. I suffered, and
      when it rained, every drop cut into my heart like a bullet, and I could
      have gone on my knees to Masha and apologised for the weather. When the
      peasants made a row in the yard, I felt that it was my fault. I would sit
      for hours in one place, thinking only how splendid and how wonderful Masha
      was. I loved her passionately, and I was enraptured by everything she did
      and said. Her taste was for quiet indoor occupation; she loved to read for
      hours and to study; she who knew about farm-work only from books,
      surprised us all by her knowledge and the advice she gave was always
      useful, and when applied was never in vain. And in addition she had the
      fineness, the taste, and the good sense, the very sound sense which only
      very well-bred people possess!
    

      To such a woman, with her healthy, orderly mind, the chaotic environment
      with its petty cares and dirty tittle-tattle, in which we lived, was very
      painful. I could see that, and I, too, could not sleep at night. My brain
      whirled and I could hardly choke back my tears. I tossed about, not
      knowing what to do.
    

      I used to rush to town and bring Masha books, newspapers, sweets, flowers,
      and I used to go fishing with Stiepan, dragging for hours, neck-deep in
      cold water, in the rain, to catch an eel by way of varying our fare. I
      used humbly to ask the peasants not to shout, and I gave them vodka,
      bribed them, promised them anything they asked. And what a lot of other
      foolish things I did!
    

      At last the rain stopped. The earth dried up. I used to get up in the
      morning and go into the garden—dew shining on the flowers, birds and
      insects shrilling, not a cloud in the sky, and the garden, the meadow, the
      river were so beautiful, perfect but for the memory of the peasants and
      the carts and the engineer. Masha and I used to drive out in a car to see
      how the oats were coming on. She drove and I sat behind; her shoulders
      were always a little hunched, and the wind would play with her hair.
    

      "Keep to the right!" she shouted to the passers-by.
    

      "You are like a coachman!" I once said to her.
    

      "Perhaps. My grandfather, my father's father, was a coachman. Didn't you
      know?" she asked, turning round, and immediately she began to mimic the
      way the coachmen shout and sing.
    

      "Thank God!" I thought, as I listened to her. "Thank God!"
    

      And again I remember the peasants, the carts, the engineer....
    

      XIII
    

      Doctor Blagovo came over on a bicycle. My sister began to come often. Once
      more we talked of manual labour and progress, and the mysterious Cross
      awaiting humanity in the remote future. The doctor did not like our life,
      because it interfered with our discussions and he said it was unworthy of
      a free man to plough, and reap, and breed cattle, and that in time all
      such elementary forms of the struggle for existence would be left to
      animals and machines, while men would devote themselves exclusively to
      scientific investigation. And my sister always asked me to let her go home
      earlier, and if she stayed late, or for the night, she was greatly
      distressed.
    

      "Good gracious, what a baby you are," Masha used to say reproachfully. "It
      is quite ridiculous."
    

      "Yes, it is absurd," my sister would agree. "I admit it is absurd, but
      what can I do if I have not the power to control myself. It always seems
      to me that I am doing wrong."
    

      During the haymaking my body, not being used to it, ached all over;
      sitting on the terrace in the evening, I would suddenly fall asleep and
      they would all laugh at me. They would wake me up and make me sit down to
      supper. I would be overcome with drowsiness and in a stupor saw lights,
      faces, plates, and heard voices without understanding what they were
      saying. And I used to get up early in the morning and take my scythe, or
      go to the school and work there all day.
    

      When I was at home on holidays I noticed that my wife and sister were
      hiding something from me and even seemed to be avoiding me. My wife was
      tender with me as always, but she had some new thought of her own which
      she did not communicate to me. Certainly her exasperation with the
      peasants had increased and life was growing harder and harder for her, but
      she no longer complained to me. She talked more readily to the doctor than
      to me, and I could not understand why.
    

      It was the custom in our province for the labourers to come to the farm in
      the evenings to be treated to vodka, even the girls having a glass. We did
      not keep the custom; the haymakers and the women used to come into the
      yard and stay until late in the evening, waiting for vodka, and then they
      went away cursing. And then Masha used to frown and relapse into silence
      or whisper irritably to the doctor:
    

      "Savages! Barbarians!"
    

      Newcomers to the villages were received ungraciously, almost with
      hostility; like new arrivals at a school. At first we were looked upon as
      foolish, soft-headed people who had bought the estate because we did not
      know what to do with our money. We were laughed at. The peasants grazed
      their cattle in our pasture and even in our garden, drove our cows and
      horses into the village and then came and asked for compensation. The
      whole village used to come into our yard and declare loudly that in mowing
      we had cut the border of common land which did not belong to us; and as we
      did not know our boundaries exactly we used to take their word for it and
      pay a fine. But afterward it appeared that we had been in the right. They
      used to bark the young lime-trees in our woods. A Dubechnia peasant, a
      money-lender, who sold vodka without a licence, bribed our labourers to
      help him cheat us in the most treacherous way; he substituted old wheels
      for the new on our wagons, stole our ploughing yokes and sold them back to
      us, and so on. But worst of all was the building at Kurilovka. There the
      women at night stole planks, bricks, tiles, iron; the bailiff and his
      assistants made a search; the women were each fined two roubles by the
      village council, and then the whole lot of them got drunk on the money.
    

      When Masha found out, she would say to the doctor and my sister:
    

      "What beasts! It is horrible! Horrible!"
    

      And more than once I heard her say she was sorry she had decided to build
      the school.
    

      "You must understand," the doctor tried to point out, "that if you build a
      school or undertake any good work, it is not for the peasants, but for the
      sake of culture and the future. The worse the peasants are the more reason
      there is for building a school. Do understand!"
    

      There was a loss of confidence in his voice, and it seemed to me that he
      hated the peasants as much as Masha.
    

      Masha used often to go to the mill with my sister and they would say
      jokingly that they were going to have a look at Stiepan because he was so
      handsome. Stiepan it appeared was reserved and silent only with men, and
      in the company of women was free and talkative. Once when I went down to
      the river to bathe I involuntarily overheard a conversation. Masha and
      Cleopatra, both in white, were sitting on the bank under the broad shade
      of a willow and Stiepan was standing near with his hands behind his back,
      saying:
    

      "But are peasants human beings? Not they; they are, excuse me, brutes,
      beasts, and thieves. What does a peasant's life consist of? Eating and
      drinking, crying for cheaper food, bawling in taverns, without decent
      conversation, or behaviour or manners. Just an ignorant beast! He lives in
      filth, his wife and children live in filth; he sleeps in his clothes;
      takes the potatoes out of the soup with his fingers, drinks down a black
      beetle with his kvass—because he won't trouble to fish it
      out!"
    

      "It is because of their poverty!" protested my sister.
    

      "What poverty? Of course there is want, but there are different kinds of
      necessity. If a man is in prison, or is blind, say, or has lost his legs,
      then he is in a bad way and God help him; but if he is at liberty and in
      command of his senses, if he has eyes and hands and strength, then, good
      God, what more does he want? It is lamentable, my lady, ignorance, but not
      poverty. If you kind people, with your education, out of charity try to
      help him, then he will spend your money in drink, like the swine he is, or
      worse still, he will open a tavern and begin to rob the people on the
      strength of your money. You say—poverty. But does a rich peasant
      live any better? He lives like a pig, too, excuse me, a clodhopper, a
      blusterer, a big-bellied blockhead, with a swollen red mug—makes me
      want to hit him in the eye, the blackguard. Look at Larion of Dubechnia—he
      is rich, but all the same he barks the trees in your woods just like the
      poor; and he is a foul-mouthed brute, and his children are foul-mouthed,
      and when he is drunk he falls flat in the mud and goes to sleep. They are
      all worthless, my lady. It is just hell to live with them in the village.
      The village sticks in my gizzard, and I thank God, the King of heaven,
      that I am well fed and clothed, and that I am a free man; I can live where
      I like, I don't want to live in the village and nobody can force me to do
      it. They say: 'You have a wife.' They say: 'You are obliged to live at
      home with your wife.' Why? I have not sold myself to her."
    

      "Tell me, Stiepan. Did you marry for love?" asked Masha.
    

      "What love is there in a village?" Stiepan answered with a smile. "If you
      want to know, my lady, it is my second marriage. I do not come from
      Kurilovka, but from Zalegosch, and I went to Kurilovka when I married. My
      father did not want to divide the land up between us—there are five
      of us. So I bowed to it and cut adrift and went to another village to my
      wife's family. My first wife died when she was young."
    

      "What did she die of?"
    

      "Foolishness. She used to sit and cry. She was always crying for no reason
      at all and so she wasted away. She used to drink herbs to make herself
      prettier and it must have ruined her inside. And my second wife at
      Kurilovka—what about her? A village woman, a peasant; that's all.
      When the match was being made I was nicely had; I thought she was young,
      nice to look at and clean. Her mother was clean enough, drank coffee and,
      chiefly because they were a clean lot, I got married. Next day we sat down
      to dinner and I told my mother-in-law to fetch me a spoon. She brought me
      a spoon and I saw her wipe it with her finger. So that, thought I, is
      their cleanliness! I lived with them for a year and went away. Perhaps I
      ought to have married a town girl"—he went on after a silence. "They
      say a wife is a helpmate to her husband. What do I want with a helpmate? I
      can look after myself. But you talk to me sensibly and soberly, without
      giggling all the while. He—he—he! What is life without a good
      talk?"
    

      Stiepan suddenly stopped and relapsed into his dreary, monotonous
      "U-lu-lu-lu." That meant that he had noticed me.
    

      Masha used often to visit the mill, she evidently took pleasure in her
      talks with Stiepan; he abused the peasants so sincerely and convincingly—and
      this attracted her to him. When she returned from the mill the idiot who
      looked after the garden used to shout after her:
    

      "Paloshka! Hullo, Paloshka!" And he would bark at her like a dog: "Bow,
      wow!"
    

      And she would stop and stare at him as if she found in the idiot's barking
      an answer to her thought, and perhaps he attracted her as much as
      Stiepan's abuse. And at home she would find some unpleasant news awaiting
      her, as that the village geese had ruined the cabbages in the
      kitchen-garden, or that Larion had stolen the reins, and she would shrug
      her shoulders with a smile and say:
    

      "What can you expect of such people?"
    

      She was exasperated and a fury was gathering in her soul, and I, on the
      other hand, was getting used to the peasants and more and more attracted
      to them. For the most part, they were nervous, irritable, absurd people;
      they were people with suppressed imaginations, ignorant, with a bare, dull
      outlook, always dazed by the same thought of the grey earth, grey days,
      black bread; they were people driven to cunning, but, like birds, they
      only hid their heads behind the trees—they could not reason. They
      did not come to us for the twenty roubles earned by haymaking, but for the
      half-pail of vodka, though they could buy four pails of vodka for the
      twenty roubles. Indeed they were dirty, drunken, and dishonest, but for
      all that one felt that the peasant life as a whole was sound at the core.
      However clumsy and brutal the peasant might look as he followed his
      antiquated plough, and however he might fuddle himself with vodka, still,
      looking at him more closely, one felt that there was something vital and
      important in him, something that was lacking in Masha and the doctor, for
      instance, namely, that he believes that the chief thing on earth is truth,
      that his and everybody's salvation lies in truth, and therefore above all
      else on earth he loves justice. I used to say to my wife that she was
      seeing the stain on the window, but not the glass itself; and she would be
      silent or, like Stiepan, she would hum, "U-lu-lu-lu...." When she, good,
      clever actress that she was, went pale with fury and then harangued the
      doctor in a trembling voice about drunkenness and dishonesty; her
      blindness confounded and appalled me. How could she forget that her
      father, the engineer, drank, drank heavily, and that the money with which
      he bought Dubechnia was acquired by means of a whole series of impudent,
      dishonest swindles? How could she forget?
    

      XIV
    

      And my sister, too, was living with her own private thoughts which she hid
      from me. She used often to sit whispering with Masha. When I went up to
      her, she would shrink away, and her eyes would look guilty and full of
      entreaty. Evidently there was something going on in her soul of which she
      was afraid or ashamed. To avoid meeting me in the garden or being left
      alone with me she clung to Masha and I hardly ever had a chance to talk to
      her except at dinner.
    

      One evening, on my way home from the school, I came quietly through the
      garden. It had already begun to grow dark. Without noticing me or hearing
      footsteps, my sister walked round an old wide-spreading apple-tree,
      perfectly noiselessly like a ghost. She was in black, and walked very
      quickly, up and down, up and down, with her eyes on the ground. An apple
      fell from the tree, she started at the noise, stopped and pressed her
      hands to her temples. At that moment I went up to her.
    

      In an impulse of tenderness, which suddenly came rushing to my heart, with
      tears in my eyes, somehow remembering our mother and our childhood, I took
      hold of her shoulders and kissed her.
    

      "What is the matter?" I asked. "You are suffering. I have seen it for a
      long time now. Tell me, what is the matter?"
    

      "I am afraid...." she murmured, with a shiver.
    

      "What's the matter with you?" I inquired. "For God's sake, be frank!"
    

      "I will, I will be frank. I will tell you the whole truth. It is so hard,
      so painful to conceal anything from you!... Misail, I am in love." She
      went on in a whisper. "Love, love.... I am happy, but I am afraid."
    

      I heard footsteps and Doctor Blagovo appeared among the trees. He was
      wearing a silk shirt and high boots. Clearly they had arranged a
      rendezvous by the apple-tree. When she saw him she flung herself
      impulsively into his arms with a cry of anguish, as though he was being
      taken away from her:
    

      "Vladimir! Vladimir!"
    

      She clung to him, and gazed eagerly at him and only then I noticed how
      thin and pale she had become. It was especially noticeable through her
      lace collar, which I had known for years, for it now hung loosely about
      her slim neck. The doctor was taken aback, but controlled himself at once,
      and said, as he stroked her hair:
    

      "That's enough. Enough!... Why are you so nervous? You see, I have come."
    

      We were silent for a time, bashfully glancing at each other. Then we all
      moved away and I heard the doctor saying to me:
    

      "Civilised life has not yet begun with us. The old console themselves with
      saying that, if there is nothing now, there was something in the forties
      and the sixties; that is all right for the old ones, but we are young and
      our brains are not yet touched with senile decay. We cannot console
      ourselves with such illusions. The beginning of Russia was in 862, and
      civilised Russia, as I understand it, has not yet begun."
    

      But I could not bother about what he was saying. It was very strange, but
      I could not believe that my sister was in love, that she had just been
      walking with her hand on the arm of a stranger and gazing at him tenderly.
      My sister, poor, frightened, timid, downtrodden creature as she was, loved
      a man who was already married and had children! I was full of pity without
      knowing why; the doctor's presence was distasteful to me and I could not
      make out what was to come of such a love.
    

      XV
    

      Masha and I drove over to Kurilovka for the opening of the school.
    

      "Autumn, autumn, autumn...." said Masha, looking about her. Summer had
      passed. There were no birds and only the willows were green.
    

      Yes. Summer had passed. The days were bright and warm, but it was fresh in
      the mornings; the shepherds went out in their sheepskins, and the dew
      never dried all day on the asters in the garden. There were continual
      mournful sounds and it was impossible to tell whether it was a shutter
      creaking on its rusty hinges or the cranes flying—and one felt so
      well and so full of the desire for life!
    

      "Summer has passed...." said Masha. "Now we can both make up our accounts.
      We have worked hard and thought a great deal and we are the better for it—all
      honour and praise to us; we have improved ourselves; but have our
      successes had any perceptible influence on the life around us, have they
      been of any use to a single person? No! Ignorance, dirt, drunkenness, a
      terribly high rate of infant mortality—everything is just as it was,
      and no one is any the better for your having ploughed and sown and my
      having spent money and read books. Evidently we have only worked and
      broadened our minds for ourselves."
    

      I was abashed by such arguments and did not know what to think.
    

      "From beginning to end we have been sincere," I said, "and if a man is
      sincere, he is right."
    

      "Who denies that? We have been right but we have been wrong in our way of
      setting about it. First of all, are not our very ways of living wrong? You
      want to be useful to people, but by the mere fact of buying an estate you
      make it impossible to be so. Further, if you work, dress, and eat like a
      peasant you lend your authority and approval to the clumsy clothes, and
      their dreadful houses and their dirty beards.... On the other hand,
      suppose you work for a long, long time, all you life, and in the end
      obtain some practical results—what will your results amount to, what
      can they do against such elemental forces as wholesale ignorance, hunger,
      cold, and degeneracy? A drop in the ocean! Other methods of fighting are
      necessary, strong, bold, quick! If you want to be useful then you must
      leave the narrow circle of common activity and try to act directly on the
      masses! First of all, you need vigorous, noisy, propaganda. Why are art
      and music, for instance, so much alive and so popular and so powerful?
      Because the musician or the singer influences thousands directly. Art,
      wonderful art!" She looked wistfully at the sky and went on: "Art gives
      wings and carries you far, far away. If you are bored with dirt and
      pettifogging interests, if you are exasperated and outraged and indignant,
      rest and satisfaction are only to be found in beauty."
    

      As we approached Kurilovka the weather was fine, clear, and joyous. In the
      yards the peasants were thrashing and there was a smell of corn and straw.
      Behind the wattled hedges the fruit-trees were reddening and all around
      the trees were red or golden. In the church-tower the bells were ringing,
      the children were carrying ikons to the school and singing the Litany of
      the Virgin. And how clear the air was, and how high the doves soared!
    

      The Te Deum was sung in the schoolroom. Then the Kurilovka peasants
      presented Masha with an ikon, and the Dubechnia peasants gave her a large
      cracknel and a gilt salt-cellar. And Masha began to weep.
    

      "And if we have said anything out of the way or have been discontented,
      please forgive us," said an old peasant, bowing to us both.
    

      As we drove home Masha looked back at the school. The green roof which I
      had painted glistened in the sun, and we could see it for a long time. And
      I felt that Masha's glances were glances of farewell.
    

      XVI
    

      In the evening she got ready to go to town.
    

      She had often been to town lately to stay the night. In her absence I
      could not work, and felt listless and disheartened; our big yard seemed
      dreary, disgusting, and deserted; there were ominous noises in the garden,
      and without her the house, the trees, the horses were no longer "ours."
    

      I never went out but sat all the time at her writing-table among her books
      on farming and agriculture, those deposed favourites, wanted no more,
      which looked out at me so shamefacedly from the bookcase. For hours
      together, while it struck seven, eight, nine, and the autumn night crept
      up as black as soot to the windows, I sat brooding over an old glove of
      hers, or the pen she always used, and her little scissors. I did nothing
      and saw clearly that everything I had done before, ploughing, sowing, and
      felling trees, had only been because she wanted it. And if she told me to
      clean out a well, when I had to stand waist-deep in water, I would go and
      do it, without trying to find out whether the well wanted cleaning or not.
      And now, when she was away, Dubechnia with its squalor, its litter, its
      slamming shutters, with thieves prowling about it day and night, seemed to
      me like a chaos in which work was entirely useless. And why should I work,
      then? Why trouble and worry about the future, when I felt that the ground
      was slipping away from under me, that my position at Dubechnia was hollow,
      that, in a word, the same fate awaited me as had befallen the books on
      agriculture? Oh! what anguish it was at night, in the lonely hours, when I
      lay listening uneasily, as though I expected some one any minute to call
      out that it was time for me to go away. I was not sorry to leave
      Dubechnia, my sorrow was for my love, for which it seemed that autumn had
      already begun. What a tremendous happiness it is to love and to be loved,
      and what a horror it is to feel that you are beginning to topple down from
      that lofty tower!
    

      Masha returned from town toward evening on the following day. She was
      dissatisfied with something, but concealed it and said only: "Why have the
      winter windows been put in? It will be stifling." I opened two of the
      windows. We did not feel like eating, but we sat down and had supper.
    

      "Go and wash your hands," she said. "You smell of putty."
    

      She had brought some new illustrated magazines from town and we both read
      them after supper. They had supplements with fashion-plates and patterns.
      Masha just glanced at them and put them aside to look at them carefully
      later on; but one dress, with a wide, bell-shaped skirt and big sleeves
      interested her, and for a moment she looked at it seriously and
      attentively.
    

      "That's not bad," she said.
    

      "Yes, it would suit you very well," said I. "Very well."
    

      And I admired the dress, only because she liked it, and went on tenderly:
    

      "A wonderful, lovely dress! Lovely, wonderful, Masha. My dear Masha!"
    

      And tears began to drop on the fashion-plate.
    

      "Wonderful Masha...." I murmured. "Dear, darling Masha...."
    

      She went and lay down and I sat still for an hour and looked at the
      illustrations.
    

      "You should not have opened the windows," she called from the bedroom.
      "I'm afraid it will be cold. Look how the wind is blowing in!"
    

      I read the miscellany, about the preparation of cheap fish, and the size
      of the largest diamond in the world. Then I chanced on the picture of the
      dress she had liked and I imagined her at a ball, with a fan, and bare
      shoulders, a brilliant, dazzling figure, well up in music and painting and
      literature, and how insignificant and brief my share in her life seemed to
      be!
    

      Our coming together, our marriage, was only an episode, one of many in the
      life of this lively, highly gifted creature. All the best things in the
      world, as I have said, were at her service, and she had them for nothing;
      even ideas and fashionable intellectual movements served her pleasure, a
      diversion in her existence, and I was only the coachman who drove her from
      one infatuation to another. Now I was no longer necessary to her; she
      would fly away and I should be left alone.
    

      As if in answer to my thoughts a desperate scream suddenly came from the
      yard:
    

      "Mur-der!"
    

      It was a shrill female voice, and exactly as though it were trying to
      imitate it, the wind also howled dismally in the chimney. Half a minute
      passed and again it came through the sound of the wind, but as though from
      the other end of the yard:
    

      "Mur-der!"
    

      "Misail, did you hear that?" said my wife in a hushed voice. "Did you
      hear?"
    

      She came out of the bedroom in her nightgown, with her hair down, and
      stood listening and staring out of the dark window.
    

      "Somebody is being murdered!" she muttered. "It only wanted that!"
    

      I took my gun and went out; it was very dark outside; a violent wind was
      blowing so that it was hard to stand up. I walked to the gate and
      listened; the trees were moaning; the wind went whistling through them,
      and in the garden the idiot's dog was howling. Beyond the gate it was
      pitch dark; there was not a light on the railway. And just by the wing,
      where the offices used to be, I suddenly heard a choking cry:
    

      "Mur-der!"
    

      "Who is there?" I called.
    

      Two men were locked in a struggle. One had nearly thrown the other, who
      was resisting with all his might. And both were breathing heavily.
    

      "Let go!" said one of them and I recognised Ivan Cheprakov. It was he who
      had cried out in a thin, falsetto voice. "Let go, damn you, or I'll bite
      your hands!"
    

      The other man I recognised as Moissey. I parted them and could not resist
      hitting Moissey in the face twice. He fell down, then got up, and I struck
      him again.
    

      "He tried to kill me," he muttered. "I caught him creeping to his mother's
      drawer.... I tried to shut him up in the wing for safety."
    

      Cheprakov was drunk and did not recognise me. He stood gasping for breath
      as though trying to get enough wind to shriek again.
    

      I left them and went back to the house. My wife was lying on the bed,
      fully dressed. I told her what had happened in the yard and did not keep
      back the fact that I had struck Moissey.
    

      "Living in the country is horrible," she said. "And what a long night it
      is!"
    

      "Mur-der!" we heard again, a little later.
    

      "I'll go and part them," I said.
    

      "No. Let them kill each other," she said with an expression of disgust.
    

      She lay staring at the ceiling, listening, and I sat near her, not daring
      to speak and feeling that it was my fault that screams of "murder" came
      from the yard and the night was so long.
    

      We were silent and I waited impatiently for the light to peep in at the
      window. And Masha looked as though she had wakened from a long sleep and
      was astonished to find herself, so clever, so educated, so refined, cast
      away in this miserable provincial hole, among a lot of petty, shallow
      people, and to think that she could have so far forgotten herself as to
      have been carried away by one of them and to have been his wife for more
      than half a year. It seemed to me that we were all the same to her—myself,
      Moissey, Cheprakov; all swept together into the drunken, wild scream of
      "murder"—myself, our marriage, our work, and the muddy roads of
      autumn; and when she breathed or stirred to make herself more comfortable
      I could read in her eyes: "Oh, if the morning would come quicker!"
    

      In the morning she went away.
    

      I stayed at Dubechnia for another three days, waiting for her; then I
      moved all our things into one room, locked it, and went to town. When I
      rang the bell at the engineer's, it was evening, and the lamps were alight
      in Great Gentry Street. Pavel told me that nobody was at home; Victor
      Ivanich had gone to Petersburg and Maria Victorovna must be at a rehearsal
      at the Azhoguins'. I remember the excitement with which I went to the
      Azhoguins', and how my heart thumped and sank within me, as I went
      up-stairs and stood for a long while on the landing, not daring to enter
      that temple of the Muses! In the hall, on the table, on the piano, on the
      stage, there were candles burning; all in threes, for the first
      performance was fixed for the thirteenth, and the dress rehearsal was on
      Monday—the unlucky day. A fight against prejudice! All the lovers of
      dramatic art were assembled; the eldest, the middle, and the youngest Miss
      Azhoguin were walking about the stage, reading their parts. Radish was
      standing still in a corner all by himself, with his head against the wall,
      looking at the stage with adoring eyes, waiting for the beginning of the
      rehearsal. Everything was just the same!
    

      I went toward my hostess to greet her, when suddenly everybody began to
      say "Ssh" and to wave their hands to tell me not to make such a noise.
      There was a silence. The top of the piano was raised, a lady sat down,
      screwing up her short-sighted eyes at the music, and Masha stood by the
      piano, dressed up, beautiful, but beautiful in an odd new way, not at all
      like the Masha who used to come to see me at the mill in the spring. She
      began to sing:
    

      "Why do I love thee, straight night?"
    

      It was the first time since I had known her that I had heard her sing. She
      had a fine, rich, powerful voice, and to hear her sing was like eating a
      ripe, sweet-scented melon. She finished the song and was applauded. She
      smiled and looked pleased, made play with her eyes, stared at the music,
      plucked at her dress exactly like a bird which has broken out of its cage
      and preens its wings at liberty. Her hair was combed back over her ears,
      and she had a sly defiant expression on her face, as though she wished to
      challenge us all, or to shout at us, as though we were horses: "Gee up,
      old things!"
    

      And at that moment she must have looked very like her grandfather, the
      coachman.
    

      "You here, too?" she asked, giving me her hand. "Did you hear me sing? How
      did you like it?" And, without waiting for me to answer she went on: "You
      arrived very opportunely. I'm going to Petersburg for a short time
      to-night. May I?"
    

      At midnight I took her to the station. She embraced me tenderly, probably
      out of gratitude, because I did not pester her with useless questions, and
      she promised to write to me, and I held her hands for a long time and
      kissed them, finding it hard to keep back my tears, and not saying a word.
    

      And when the train moved, I stood looking at the receding lights, kissed
      her in my imagination and whispered:
    

      "Masha dear, wonderful Masha!..."
    

      I spent the night at Mikhokhov, at Karpovna's, and in the morning I worked
      with Radish, upholstering the furniture at a rich merchant's, who had
      married his daughter to a doctor.
    

      XVII
    

      On Sunday afternoon my sister came to see me and had tea with me.
    

      "I read a great deal now," she said, showing me the books she had got out
      of the town library on her way. "Thanks to your wife and Vladimir. They
      awakened my self-consciousness. They saved me and have made me feel that I
      am a human being. I used not to sleep at night for worrying: 'What a lot
      of sugar has been wasted during the week.' 'The cucumbers must not be
      oversalted!' I don't sleep now, but I have quite different thoughts. I am
      tormented with the thought that half my life has passed so foolishly and
      half-heartedly. I despise my old life. I am ashamed of it. And I regard my
      father now as an enemy. Oh, how grateful I am to your wife! And Vladimir.
      He is such a wonderful man! They opened my eyes."
    

      "It is not good that you can't sleep," I said.
    

      "You think I am ill? Not a bit. Vladimir sounded me and says I am
      perfectly healthy. But health is not the point. That doesn't matter so
      much.... Tell me, am I right?"
    

      She needed moral support. That was obvious. Masha had gone, Doctor Blagovo
      was in Petersburg, and there was no one except myself in the town, who
      could tell her that she was right. She fixed her eyes on me, trying to
      read my inmost thoughts, and if I were sad in her presence, she always
      took it upon herself and was depressed. I had to be continually on my
      guard, and when she asked me if she was right, I hastened to assure her
      that she was right and that I had a profound respect for her.
    

      "You know, they have given me a part at the Azhoguins'," she went on. "I
      wanted to act. I want to live. I want to drink deep of life; I have no
      talent whatever, and my part is only ten lines, but it is immeasurably
      finer and nobler than pouring out tea five times a day and watching to see
      that the cook does not eat the sugar left over. And most of all I want to
      let father see that I too can protest."
    

      After tea she lay down on my bed and stayed there for some time, with her
      eyes closed, and her face very pale.
    

      "Just weakness!" she said, as she got up. "Vladimir said all town girls
      and women are anæmic from lack of work. What a clever man Vladimir
      is! He is right; wonderfully right! We do need work!"
    

      Two days later she came to rehearsal at the Azhoguins' with her part in
      her hand. She was in black, with a garnet necklace, and a brooch that
      looked at a distance like a pasty, and she had enormous earrings, in each
      of which sparkled a diamond. I felt uneasy when I saw her; I was shocked
      by her lack of taste. The others noticed too that she was unsuitably
      dressed and that her earrings and diamonds were out of place. I saw their
      smiles and heard some one say jokingly:
    

      "Cleopatra of Egypt!"
    

      She was trying to be fashionable, and easy, and assured, and she seemed
      affected and odd. She lost her simplicity and her charm.
    

      "I just told father that I was going to a rehearsal," she began, coming up
      to me, "and he shouted that he would take his blessing from me, and he
      nearly struck me. Fancy," she added, glancing at her part, "I don't know
      my part. I'm sure to make a mistake. Well, the die is cast," she said
      excitedly; "the die is cast."
    

      She felt that all the people were looking at her and were all amazed at
      the important step she had taken and that they were all expecting
      something remarkable from her, and it was impossible to convince her that
      nobody took any notice of such small uninteresting persons as she and I.
    

      She had nothing to do until the third act, and her part, a guest, a
      country gossip, consisted only in standing by the door, as if she were
      overhearing something, and then speaking a short monologue. For at least
      an hour and a half before her cue, while the others were walking, reading,
      having tea, quarrelling, she never left me and kept on mumbling her part,
      and dropping her written copy, imagining that everybody was looking at
      her, and waiting for her to come on, and she patted her hair with a
      trembling hand and said:
    

      "I'm sure to make a mistake.... You don't know how awful I feel! I am as
      terrified as if I were going to the scaffold."
    

      At last her cue came.
    

      "Cleopatra Alexeyevna—your cue!" said the manager.
    

      She walked on to the middle of the stage with an expression of terror on
      her face; she looked ugly and stiff, and for half a minute was speechless,
      perfectly motionless, except for her large earrings which wabbled on
      either side of her face.
    

      "You can read your part, the first time," said some one.
    

      I could see that she was trembling so that she could neither speak nor
      open her part, and that she had entirely forgotten the words and I had
      just made up my mind to go up and say something to her when she suddenly
      dropped down on her knees in the middle of the stage and sobbed loudly.
    

      There was a general stir and uproar. And I stood quite still by the wings,
      shocked by what had happened, not understanding at all, not knowing what
      to do. I saw them lift her up and lead her away. I saw Aniuta Blagovo come
      up to me. I had not seen her in the hall before and she seemed to have
      sprung up from the floor. She was wearing a hat and veil, and as usual
      looked as if she had only dropped in for a minute.
    

      "I told her not to try to act," she said angrily, biting out each word,
      with her cheeks blushing. "It is folly! You ought to have stopped her!"
    

      Mrs. Azhoguin came up in a short jacket with short sleeves. She had
      tobacco ash on her thin, flat bosom.
    

      "My dear, it is too awful!" she said, wringing her hands, and as usual,
      staring into my face. "It is too awful!... Your sister is in a
      condition.... She is going to have a baby! You must take her away at
      once...."
    

      In her agitation she breathed heavily. And behind her, stood her three
      daughters, all thin and flat-chested like herself, and all huddled
      together in their dismay. They were frightened, overwhelmed just as if a
      convict had been caught in the house. What a shame! How awful! And this
      was the family that had been fighting the prejudices and superstitions of
      mankind all their lives; evidently they thought that all the prejudices
      and superstitions of mankind were to be found in burning three candles and
      in the number thirteen, or the unlucky day—Monday.
    

      "I must request ... request ..." Mrs. Azhoguin kept on saying, compressing
      her lips and accentuating the quest. "I must request you to take
      her away."
    

      XVIII
    

      A little later my sister and I were walking along the street. I covered
      her with the skirt of my overcoat; we hurried along through by-streets,
      where there were no lamps, avoiding the passers-by, and it was like a
      flight. She did not weep any more, but stared at me with dry eyes. It was
      about twenty minutes' walk to Mikhokhov, whither I was taking her, and in
      that short time we went over the whole of our lives, and talked over
      everything, and considered the position and pondered....
    

      We decided that we could not stay in the town, and that when I could get
      some money, we would go to some other place. In some of the houses the
      people were asleep already, and in others they were playing cards; we
      hated those houses, were afraid of them, and we talked of the fanaticism,
      callousness, and nullity of these respectable families, these lovers of
      dramatic art whom we had frightened so much, and I wondered how those
      stupid, cruel, slothful, dishonest people were better than the drunken and
      superstitious peasants of Kurilovka, or how they were better than animals,
      which also lose their heads when some accident breaks the monotony of
      their lives, which are limited by their instincts. What would happen to my
      sister if she stayed at home? What moral torture would she have to
      undergo, talking to my father and meeting acquaintances every day? I
      imagined it all and there came into my memory people I had known who had
      been gradually dropped by their friends and relations, and I remember the
      tortured dogs which had gone mad, and sparrows plucked alive and thrown
      into the water—and a whole long series of dull, protracted
      sufferings which I had seen going on in the town since my childhood; and I
      could not conceive what the sixty thousand inhabitants lived for, why they
      read the Bible, why they prayed, why they skimmed books and magazines.
      What good was all that had been written and said, if they were in the same
      spiritual darkness and had the same hatred of freedom, as if they were
      living hundreds and hundreds of years ago? The builder spends his time
      putting up houses all over the town, and yet would go down to his grave
      saying "galdary" for "gallery." And the sixty thousand inhabitants had
      read and heard of truth and mercy and freedom for generations, but to the
      bitter end they would go on lying from morning to night, tormenting one
      another, fearing and hating freedom as a deadly enemy.
    

      "And so, my fate is decided," said my sister when we reached home. "After
      what has happened I can never go there again. My God, how good it
      is! I feel at peace."
    

      She lay down at once. Tears shone on her eyelashes, but her expression was
      happy. She slept soundly and softly, and it was clear that her heart was
      easy and that she was at rest. For a long, long time she had not slept so
      well.
    

      So we began to live together. She was always singing and said she felt
      very well, and I took back the books we had borrowed from the library
      unread, because she gave up reading; she only wanted to dream and to talk
      of the future. She would hum as she mended my clothes or helped Karpovna
      with the cooking, or talk of her Vladimir, of his mind, and his goodness,
      and his fine manners, and his extraordinary learning. And I agreed with
      her, though I no longer liked the doctor. She wanted to work, to be
      independent, and to live by herself, and she said she would become a
      school-teacher or a nurse as soon as her health allowed, and she would
      scrub the floors and do her own washing. She loved her unborn baby
      passionately, and she knew already the colour of his eyes and the shape of
      his hands and how he laughed. She liked to talk of his upbringing, and
      since the best man on earth was Vladimir, all her ideas were reduced to
      making the boy as charming as his father. There was no end to her chatter,
      and everything she talked about filled her with a lively joy. Sometimes I,
      too, rejoiced, though I knew not why.
    

      She must have infected me with her dreaminess, for I, too, read nothing
      and just dreamed. In the evenings, in spite of being tired, I used to pace
      up and down the room with my hands in my pockets, talking about Masha.
    

      "When do you think she will return?" I used to ask my sister. "I think
      she'll be back at Christmas. Not later. What is she doing there?"
    

      "If she doesn't write to you, it means she must be coming soon."
    

      "True," I would agree, though I knew very well that there was nothing to
      make Masha return to our town.
    

      I missed her very much, but I could not help deceiving myself and wanted
      others to deceive me. My sister was longing for her doctor, I for Masha,
      and we both laughed and talked and never saw that we were keeping Karpovna
      from sleeping. She would lie on the stove and murmur:
    

      "The samovar tinkled this morning. Tink-led! That bodes nobody any good,
      my merry friends!"
    

      Nobody came to the house except the postman who brought my sister letters
      from the doctor, and Prokofyi, who used to come in sometimes in the
      evening and glance secretly at my sister, and then go into the kitchen and
      say:
    

      "Every class has its ways, and if you're too proud to understand that, the
      worse for you in this vale of tears."
    

      He loved the expression—vale of tears. And—about Christmas
      time—when I was going through the market, he called me into his
      shop, and without giving me his hand, declared that he had some important
      business to discuss. He was red in the face with the frost and with vodka;
      near him by the counter stood Nicolka of the murderous face, holding a
      bloody knife in his hand.
    

      "I want to be blunt with you," began Prokofyi. "This business must not
      happen because, as you know, people will neither forgive you nor us for
      such a vale of tears. Mother, of course, is too dutiful to say anything
      unpleasant to you herself, and tell you that your sister must go somewhere
      else because of her condition, but I don't want it either, because I do
      not approve of her behaviour."
    

      I understood and left the shop. That very day my sister and I went to
      Radish's. We had no money for a cab, so we went on foot; I carried a
      bundle with all our belongings on my back, my sister had nothing in her
      hands, and she was breathless and kept coughing and asking if we would
      soon be there.
    

      XIX
    

      At last there came a letter from Masha.
    

      "My dear, kind M. A.," she wrote, "my brave, sweet angel, as the old
      painter calls you, good-bye. I am going to America with my father for the
      exhibition. In a few days I shall be on the ocean—so far from
      Dubechnia. It is awful to think of! It is vast and open like the sky and I
      long for it and freedom. I rejoice and dance about and you see how
      incoherent my letter is. My dear Misail, give me my freedom. Quick, tear
      the thread which still holds and binds us. My meeting and knowing you was
      a ray from heaven, which brightened my existence. But, you know, my
      becoming your wife was a mistake, and the knowledge of the mistake weighs
      me down, and I implore you on my knees, my dear, generous friend, quick—quick—before
      I go over the sea—wire that you will agree to correct our mutual
      mistake, remove then the only burden on my wings, and my father, who will
      be responsible for the whole business, has promised me not to overwhelm
      you with formalities. So, then, I am free of the whole world? Yes?
    

      "Be happy. God bless you. Forgive my wickedness.
    

      "I am alive and well. I am squandering money on all sorts of follies, and
      every minute I thank God that such a wicked woman as I am has no children.
      I am singing and I am a success, but it is not a passing whim. No. It is
      my haven, my convent cell where I go for rest. King David had a ring with
      an inscription: 'Everything passes.' When one is sad, these words make one
      cheerful; and when one is cheerful, they make one sad. And I have got a
      ring with the words written in Hebrew, and this talisman will keep me from
      losing my heart and head. Or does one need nothing but consciousness of
      freedom, because, when one is free, one wants nothing, nothing, nothing.
      Snap the thread then. I embrace you and your sister warmly. Forgive and
      forget your M."
    

      My sister had one room. Radish, who had been ill and was recovering, was
      in the other. Just as I received this letter, my sister went into the
      painter's room and sat by his side and began to read to him. She read
      Ostrovsky or Gogol to him every day, and he used to listen, staring
      straight in front of him, never laughing, shaking his head, and every now
      and then muttering to himself:
    

      "Anything may happen! Anything may happen!"
    

      If there was anything ugly in what she read, he would say vehemently,
      pointing to the book:
    

      "There it is! Lies! That's what lies do!"
    

      Stories used to attract him by their contents as well as by their moral
      and their skilfully complicated plot, and he used to marvel at him,
      though he never called him by his name.
    

      "How well he has managed it."
    

      Now my sister read a page quickly and then stopped, because her breath
      failed her. Radish held her hand, and moving his dry lips he said in a
      hoarse, hardly audible voice:
    

      "The soul of the righteous is white and smooth as chalk; and the soul of
      the sinner is as a pumice-stone. The soul of the righteous is clear oil,
      and the soul of the sinner is coal-tar. We must work and sorrow and pity,"
      he went on. "And if a man does not work and sorrow he will not enter the
      kingdom of heaven. Woe, woe to the well fed, woe to the strong, woe to the
      rich, woe to the usurers! They will not see the kingdom of heaven. Grubs
      eat grass, rust eats iron...."
    

      "And lies devour the soul," said my sister, laughing.
    

      I read the letter once more. At that moment the soldier came into the
      kitchen who had brought in twice a week, without saying from whom, tea,
      French bread, and pigeons, all smelling of scent. I had no work and used
      to sit at home for days together, and probably the person who sent us the
      bread knew that we were in want.
    

      I heard my sister talking to the soldier and laughing merrily. Then she
      lay down and ate some bread and said to me:
    

      "When you wanted to get away from the office and become a house-painter,
      Aniuta Blagovo and I knew from the very beginning that you were right, but
      we were afraid to say so. Tell me what power is it that keeps us from
      saying what we feel? There's Aniuta Blagovo. She loves you, adores you,
      and she knows that you are right. She loves me, too, like a sister, and
      she knows that I am right, and in her heart she envies me, but some power
      prevents her coming to see us. She avoids us. She is afraid."
    

      My sister folded her hands across her bosom and said rapturously:
    

      "If you only knew how she loves you! She confessed it to me and to no one
      else, very hesitatingly, in the dark. She used to take me out into the
      garden, into the dark, and begin to tell me in a whisper how dear you were
      to her. You will see that she will never marry because she loves you. Are
      you sorry for her?"
    

      "Yes."
    

      "It was she sent the bread. She is funny. Why should she hide herself? I
      used to be silly and stupid, but I left all that and I am not afraid of
      any one, and I think and say aloud what I like—and I am happy. When
      I lived at home I had no notion of happiness, and now I would not change
      places with a queen."
    

      Doctor Blagovo came. He had got his diploma and was now living in the
      town, at his father's, taking a rest. After which he said he would go back
      to Petersburg. He wanted to devote himself to vaccination against typhus,
      and, I believe, cholera; he wanted to go abroad to increase his knowledge
      and then to become a University professor. He had already left the army
      and wore serge clothes, with well-cut coats, wide trousers, and expensive
      ties. My sister was enraptured with his pins and studs and his red-silk
      handkerchief, which, out of swagger, he wore in his outside breast-pocket.
      Once, when we had nothing to do, she and I fell to counting up his suits
      and came to the conclusion that he must have at least ten. It was clear
      that he still loved my sister, but never once, even in joke, did he talk
      of taking her to Petersburg or abroad with him, and I could not imagine
      what would happen to her if she lived, or what was to become of her child.
      But she was happy in her dreams and would not think seriously of the
      future. She said he could go wherever he liked and even cast her aside, if
      only he were happy himself, and what had been was enough for her.
    

      Usually when he came to see us he would sound her very carefully, and ask
      her to drink some milk with some medicine in it. He did so now. He sounded
      her and made her drink a glass of milk, and the room began to smell of
      creosote.
    

      "That's a good girl," he said, taking the glass from her. "You must not
      talk much, and you have been chattering like a magpie lately. Please, be
      quiet."
    

      She began to laugh and he came into Radish's room, where I was sitting,
      and tapped me affectionately on the shoulder.
    

      "Well, old man, how are you?" he asked, bending over the patient.
    

      "Sir," said Radish, only just moving his lips. "Sir, I make so bold.... We
      are all in the hands of God, and we must all die.... Let me tell you the
      truth, sir.... You will never enter the kingdom of heaven."
    

      And suddenly I lost consciousness and was caught up into a dream: it was
      winter, at night, and I was standing in the yard of the slaughter-house
      with Prokofyi by my side, smelling of pepper-brandy; I pulled myself
      together and rubbed my eyes and then I seemed to be going to the
      governor's for an explanation. Nothing of the kind ever happened to me,
      before or after, and I can only explain these strange dreams like
      memories, by ascribing them to overstrain of the nerves. I lived again
      through the scene in the slaughter-house and the conversation with the
      governor, and at the same time I was conscious of its unreality.
    

      When I came to myself I saw that I was not at home, but standing with the
      doctor by a lamp in the street.
    

      "It is sad, sad," he was saying with tears running down his cheeks. "She
      is happy and always laughing and full of hope. But, poor darling, her
      condition is hopeless. Old Radish hates me and keeps trying to make me
      understand that I have wronged her. In his way he is right, but I have my
      point of view, too, and I do not repent of what has happened. It is
      necessary to love. We must all love. That's true, isn't it? Without love
      there would be no life, and a man who avoids and fears love is not free."
    

      We gradually passed to other subjects. He began to speak of science and
      his dissertation which had been very well received in Petersburg. He spoke
      enthusiastically and thought no more of my sister, or of his going, or of
      myself. Life was carrying him away. She has America and a ring with an
      inscription, I thought, and he has his medical degree and his scientific
      career, and my sister and I are left with the past.
    

      When we parted I stood beneath the lamp and read my letter again. And I
      remembered vividly how she came to me at the mill that spring morning and
      lay down and covered herself with my fur coat—pretending to be just
      a peasant woman. And another time—also in the early morning—when
      we pulled the bow-net out of the water, and the willows on the bank
      showered great drops of water on us and we laughed....
    

      All was dark in our house in Great Gentry Street. I climbed the fence,
      and, as I used to do in old days, I went into the kitchen by the back door
      to get a little lamp. There was nobody in the kitchen. On the stove the
      samovar was singing merrily, all ready for my father. "Who pours out my
      father's tea now?" I thought. I took the lamp and went on to the shed and
      made a bed of old newspapers and lay down. The nails in the wall looked
      ominous as before and their shadows flickered. It was cold. I thought I
      saw my sister coming in with my supper, but I remembered at once that she
      was ill at Radish's, and it seemed strange to me that I should have
      climbed the fence and be lying in the cold shed. My mind was blurred and
      filled with fantastic imaginations.
    

      A bell rang; sounds familiar from childhood; first the wire rustled along
      the wall, and then there was a short, melancholy tinkle in the kitchen. It
      was my father returning from the club. I got up and went into the kitchen.
      Akhsinya, the cook, clapped her hands when she saw me and began to cry:
    

      "Oh, my dear," she said in a whisper. "Oh, my dear! My God!"
    

      And in her agitation she began to pluck at her apron. On the window-sill
      were two large bottles of berries soaking in vodka. I poured out a cup and
      gulped it down, for I was very thirsty. Akhsinya had just scrubbed the
      table and the chairs, and the kitchen had the good smell which kitchens
      always have when the cook is clean and tidy. This smell and the trilling
      of the cricket used to entice us into the kitchen when we were children,
      and there we used to be told fairy-tales, and we played at kings and
      queens....
    

      "And where is Cleopatra?" asked Akhsinya hurriedly, breathlessly. "And
      where is your hat, sir? And they say your wife has gone to Petersburg."
    

      She had been with us in my mother's time and used to bathe Cleopatra and
      me in a tub, and we were still children to her, and it was her duty to
      correct us. In a quarter of an hour or so she laid bare all her thoughts,
      which she had been storing up in her quiet kitchen all the time I had been
      away. She said the doctor ought to be made to marry Cleopatra—we
      would only have to frighten him a bit and make him send in a nicely
      written application, and then the archbishop would dissolve his first
      marriage, and it would be a good thing to sell Dubechnia without saying
      anything to my wife, and to bank the money in my own name; and if my
      sister and I went on our knees to our father and asked him nicely, then
      perhaps he would forgive us; and we ought to pray to the Holy Mother to
      intercede for us....
    

      "Now, sir, go and talk to him," she said, when we heard my father's cough.
      "Go, speak to him, and beg his pardon. He won't bite your head off."
    

      I went in. My father was sitting at his desk working on the plan of a
      bungalow with Gothic windows and a stumpy tower like the lookout of a
      fire-station—an immensely stiff and inartistic design. As I entered
      the study I stood so that I could not help seeing the plan. I did not know
      why I had come to my father, but I remember that when I saw his thin face,
      red neck, and his shadow on the wall, I wanted to throw my arms round him
      and, as Akhsinya had bid me, to beg his pardon humbly; but the sight of
      the bungalow with the Gothic windows and the stumpy tower stopped me.
    

      "Good evening," I said.
    

      He glanced at me and at once cast his eyes down on his plan.
    

      "What do you want?" he asked after a while.
    

      "I came to tell you that my sister is very ill. She is dying," I said
      dully.
    

      "Well?" My father sighed, took off his spectacles and laid them on the
      table. "As you have sown, so you must reap. I want you to remember how you
      came to me two years ago, and on this very spot I asked you to give up
      your delusions, and I reminded you of your honour, your duty, your
      obligations to your ancestors, whose traditions must be kept sacred. Did
      you listen to me? You spurned my advice and clung to your wicked opinions;
      furthermore, you dragged your sister into your abominable delusions and
      brought about her downfall and her shame. Now you are both suffering for
      it. As you have sown, so you must reap."
    

      He paced up and down the study as he spoke. Probably he thought that I had
      come to him to admit that I was wrong, and probably he was waiting for me
      to ask his help for my sister and myself. I was cold, but I shook as
      though I were in a fever, and I spoke with difficulty in a hoarse voice.
    

      "And I must ask you to remember," I said, "that on this very spot I
      implored you to try to understand me, to reflect, and to think what we
      were living for and to what end, and your answer was to talk about my
      ancestors and my grandfather who wrote verses. Now you are told that your
      only daughter is in a hopeless condition and you talk of ancestors and
      traditions!... And you can maintain such frivolity when death is near and
      you have only five or ten years left to live!"
    

      "Why did you come here?" asked my father sternly, evidently affronted at
      my reproaching him with frivolity.
    

      "I don't know. I love you. I am more sorry than I can say that we are so
      far apart. That is why I came. I still love you, but my sister has finally
      broken with you. She does not forgive you and will never forgive you. Your
      very name fills her with hatred of her past life."
    

      "And who is to blame?" cried my father. "You, you scoundrel!"
    

      "Yes. Say that I am to blame," I said. "I admit that I am to blame for
      many things, but why is your life, which you have tried to force on us, so
      tedious and frigid, and ungracious, why are there no people in any of the
      houses you have built during the last thirty years from whom I could learn
      how to live and how to avoid such suffering? These houses of yours are
      infernal dungeons in which mothers and daughters are persecuted, children
      are tortured.... My poor mother! My unhappy sister! One needs to drug
      oneself with vodka, cards, scandal; cringe, play the hypocrite, and go on
      year after year designing rotten houses, not to see the horror that lurks
      in them. Our town has been in existence for hundreds of years, and during
      the whole of that time it has not given the country one useful man—not
      one! You have strangled in embryo everything that was alive and joyous! A
      town of shopkeepers, publicans, clerks, and hypocrites, an aimless, futile
      town, and not a soul would be the worse if it were suddenly razed to the
      ground."
    

      "I don't want to hear you, you scoundrel," said my father, taking a ruler
      from his desk. "You are drunk! You dare come into your father's presence
      in such a state! I tell you for the last time, and you can tell this to
      your strumpet of a sister, that you will get nothing from me. I have torn
      my disobedient children out of my heart, and if they suffer through their
      disobedience and obstinacy I have no pity for them. You may go back where
      you came from! God has been pleased to punish me through you. I will
      humbly bear my punishment and, like Job, I find consolation in suffering
      and unceasing toil. You shall not cross my threshold until you have mended
      your ways. I am a just man, and everything I say is practical good sense,
      and if you had any regard for yourself, you would remember what I have
      said, and what I am saying now."
    

      I threw up my hands and went out; I do not remember what happened that
      night or next day.
    

      They say that I went staggering through the street without a hat, singing
      aloud, with crowds of little boys shouting after me:
    

      "Little Profit! Little Profit!"
    

      XX
    

      If I wanted to order a ring, I would have it inscribed: "Nothing passes."
      I believe that nothing passes without leaving some trace, and that every
      little step has some meaning for the present and the future life.
    

      What I lived through was not in vain. My great misfortunes, my patience,
      moved the hearts of the people of the town and they no longer call me
      "Little Profit," they no longer laugh at me and throw water over me as I
      walk through the market. They got used to my being a working man and see
      nothing strange in my carrying paint-pots and glazing windows; on the
      contrary, they give me orders, and I am considered a good workman and the
      best contractor, after Radish, who, though he recovered and still paints
      the cupolas of the church without scaffolding, is not strong enough to
      manage the men, and I have taken his place and go about the town touting
      for orders, and take on and sack the men, and lend money at exorbitant
      interest. And now that I am a contractor I can understand how it is
      possible to spend several days hunting through the town for slaters to
      carry out a trifling order. People are polite to me, and address me
      respectfully and give me tea in the houses where I work, and send the
      servant to ask me if I would like dinner. Children and girls often come
      and watch me with curious, sad eyes.
    

      Once I was working in the governor's garden, painting the summer-house
      marble. The governor came into the summer-house, and having nothing better
      to do, began to talk to me, and I reminded him how he had once sent for me
      to caution me. For a moment he stared at my face, opened his mouth like a
      round O, waved his hands, and said:
    

      "I don't remember."
    

      I am growing old, taciturn, crotchety, strict; I seldom laugh, and people
      say I am growing like Radish, and, like him, I bore the men with my
      aimless moralising.
    

      Maria Victorovna, my late wife, lives abroad, and her father is making a
      railway somewhere in the Eastern provinces and buying land there. Doctor
      Blagovo is also abroad. Dubechnia has passed to Mrs. Cheprakov, who bought
      it from the engineer after haggling him into a twenty-per-cent reduction
      in the price. Moissey walks about in a bowler hat; he often drives into
      town in a trap and stops outside the bank. People say he has already
      bought an estate on a mortgage, and is always inquiring at the bank about
      Dubechnia, which he also intends to buy. Poor Ivan Cheprakov used to hang
      about the town, doing nothing and drinking. I tried to give him a job in
      our business, and for a time he worked with us painting roofs and glazing,
      and he rather took to it, and, like a regular house-painter, he stole the
      oil, and asked for tips, and got drunk. But it soon bored him. He got
      tired of it and went back to Dubechnia, and some time later I was told by
      the peasants that he had been inciting them to kill Moissey one night and
      rob Mrs. Cheprakov.
    

      My father has got very old and bent, and just takes a little walk in the
      evening near his house.
    

      When we had the cholera, Prokofyi cured the shopkeepers with pepper-brandy
      and tar and took money for it, and as I read in the newspaper, he was
      flogged for libelling the doctors as he sat in his shop. His boy Nicolka
      died of cholera. Karpovna is still alive, and still loves and fears her
      Prokofyi. Whenever she sees me she sadly shakes her head and says with a
      sigh:
    

      "Poor thing. You are lost!"
    

      On week-days I am busy from early morning till late at night. And on
      Sundays and holidays I take my little niece (my sister expected a boy, but
      a girl was born) and go with her to the cemetery, where I stand or sit and
      look at the grave of my dear one, and tell the child that her mother is
      lying there.
    

      Sometimes I find Aniuta Blagovo by the grave. We greet each other and
      stand silently, or we talk of Cleopatra, and the child, and the sadness of
      this life. Then we leave the cemetery and walk in silence and she lags
      behind—on purpose, to avoid staying with me. The little girl,
      joyful, happy, with her eyes half-closed against the brilliant sunlight,
      laughs and holds out her little hands to her, and we stop and together we
      fondle the darling child.
    

      And when we reach the town, Aniuta Blagovo, blushing and agitated, says
      good-bye, and walks on alone, serious and circumspect.... And, to look at
      her, none of the passers-by could imagine that she had just been walking
      by my side and even fondling the child.
    



The Bet and Other Stories







      I
    

      It was a dark autumn night. The old banker was pacing from corner to
      corner of his study, recalling to his mind the party he gave in the autumn
      fifteen years ago. There were many clever people at the party and much
      interesting conversation. They talked among other things of capital
      punishment. The guests, among them not a few scholars and journalists, for
      the most part disapproved of capital punishment. They found it obsolete as
      a means of punishment, unfitted to a Christian State and immoral. Some of
      them thought that capital punishment should be replaced universally by
      life-imprisonment.
    

      "I don't agree with you," said the host. "I myself have experienced
      neither capital punishment nor life-imprisonment, but if one may judge a
      priori, then in my opinion capital punishment is more moral and more
      humane than imprisonment. Execution kills instantly, life-imprisonment
      kills by degrees. Who is the more humane executioner, one who kills you in
      a few seconds or one who draws the life out of you incessantly, for
      years?"
    

      "They're both equally immoral," remarked one of the guests, "because their
      purpose is the same, to take away life. The State is not God. It has no
      right to take away that which it cannot give back, if it should so
      desire."
    

      Among the company was a lawyer, a young man of about twenty-five. On being
      asked his opinion, he said:
    

      "Capital punishment and life-imprisonment are equally immoral; but if I
      were offered the choice between them, I would certainly choose the second.
      It's better to live somehow than not to live at all."
    

      There ensued a lively discussion. The banker who was then younger and more
      nervous suddenly lost his temper, banged his fist on the table, and
      turning to the young lawyer, cried out:
    

      "It's a lie. I bet you two millions you wouldn't stick in a cell even for
      five years."
    

      "If that's serious," replied the lawyer, "then I bet I'll stay not five
      but fifteen."
    

      "Fifteen! Done!" cried the banker. "Gentlemen, I stake two millions."
    

      "Agreed. You stake two millions, I my freedom," said the lawyer.
    

      So this wild, ridiculous bet came to pass. The banker, who at that time
      had too many millions to count, spoiled and capricious, was beside himself
      with rapture. During supper he said to the lawyer jokingly:
    

      "Come to your senses, young man, before it's too late. Two millions are
      nothing to me, but you stand to lose three or four of the best years of
      your life. I say three or four, because you'll never stick it out any
      longer. Don't forget either, you unhappy man, that voluntary is much
      heavier than enforced imprisonment. The idea that you have the right to
      free yourself at any moment will poison the whole of your life in the
      cell. I pity you."
    

      And now the banker pacing from corner to corner, recalled all this and
      asked himself:
    

      "Why did I make this bet? What's the good? The lawyer loses fifteen years
      of his life and I throw away two millions. Will it convince people that
      capital punishment is worse or better than imprisonment for life. No, No!
      all stuff and rubbish. On my part, it was the caprice of a well-fed man;
      on the lawyer's, pure greed of gold."
    

      He recollected further what happened after the evening party. It was
      decided that the lawyer must undergo his imprisonment under the strictest
      observation, in a garden-wing of the banker's house. It was agreed that
      during the period he would be deprived of the right to cross the
      threshold, to see living people, to hear human voices, and to receive
      letters and newspapers. He was permitted to have a musical instrument, to
      read books, to write letters, to drink wine and smoke tobacco. By the
      agreement he could communicate, but only in silence, with the outside
      world through a little window specially constructed for this purpose.
      Everything necessary, books, music, wine, he could receive in any quantity
      by sending a note through the window. The agreement provided for all the
      minutest details, which made the confinement strictly solitary, and it
      obliged the lawyer to remain exactly fifteen years from twelve o'clock of
      November 14th 1870 to twelve o'clock of November 14th 1885. The least
      attempt on his part to violate the conditions, to escape if only for two
      minutes before the time freed the banker from the obligation to pay him
      the two millions.
    

      During the first year of imprisonment, the lawyer, as far as it was
      possible to judge from his short notes, suffered terribly from loneliness
      and boredom. From his wing day and night came the sound of the piano. He
      rejected wine and tobacco. "Wine," he wrote, "excites desires, and desires
      are the chief foes of a prisoner; besides, nothing is more boring than to
      drink good wine alone," and tobacco spoils the air in his room. During the
      first year the lawyer was sent books of a light character; novels with a
      complicated love interest, stories of crime and fantasy, comedies, and so
      on.
    

      In the second year the piano was heard no longer and the lawyer asked only
      for classics. In the fifth year, music was heard again, and the prisoner
      asked for wine. Those who watched him said that during the whole of that
      year he was only eating, drinking, and lying on his bed. He yawned often
      and talked angrily to himself. Books he did not read. Sometimes at nights
      he would sit down to write. He would write for a long time and tear it all
      up in the morning. More than once he was heard to weep.
    

      In the second half of the sixth year, the prisoner began zealously to
      study languages, philosophy, and history. He fell on these subjects so
      hungrily that the banker hardly had time to get books enough for him. In
      the space of four years about six hundred volumes were bought at his
      request. It was while that passion lasted that the banker received the
      following letter from the prisoner: "My dear gaoler, I am writing these
      lines in six languages. Show them to experts. Let them read them. If they
      do not find one single mistake, I beg you to give orders to have a gun
      fired off in the garden. By the noise I shall know that my efforts have
      not been in vain. The geniuses of all ages and countries speak in
      different languages; but in them all burns the same flame. Oh, if you knew
      my heavenly happiness now that I can understand them!" The prisoner's
      desire was fulfilled. Two shots were fired in the garden by the banker's
      order.
    

      Later on, after the tenth year, the lawyer sat immovable before his table
      and read only the New Testament. The banker found it strange that a man
      who in four years had mastered six hundred erudite volumes, should have
      spent nearly a year in reading one book, easy to understand and by no
      means thick. The New Testament was then replaced by the history of
      religions and theology.
    

      During the last two years of his confinement the prisoner read an
      extraordinary amount, quite haphazard. Now he would apply himself to the
      natural sciences, then would read Byron or Shakespeare. Notes used to come
      from him in which he asked to be sent at the same time a book on
      chemistry, a text-book of medicine, a novel, and some treatise on
      philosophy or theology. He read as though he were swimming in the sea
      among the broken pieces of wreckage, and in his desire to save his life
      was eagerly grasping one piece after another.
    

      II
    

      The banker recalled all this, and thought:
    

      "To-morrow at twelve o'clock he receives his freedom. Under the agreement,
      I shall have to pay him two millions. If I pay, it's all over with me. I
      am ruined for ever...."
    

      Fifteen years before he had too many millions to count, but now he was
      afraid to ask himself which he had more of, money or debts. Gambling on
      the Stock-Exchange, risky speculation, and the recklessness of which he
      could not rid himself even in old age, had gradually brought his business
      to decay; and the fearless, self-confident, proud man of business had
      become an ordinary banker, trembling at every rise and fall in the market.
    

      "That cursed bet," murmured the old man clutching his head in despair....
      "Why didn't the man die? He's only forty years old. He will take away my
      last farthing, marry, enjoy life, gamble on the Exchange, and I will look
      on like an envious beggar and hear the same words from him every day: 'I'm
      obliged to you for the happiness of my life. Let me help you.' No, it's
      too much! The only escape from bankruptcy and disgrace—is that the
      man should die."
    

      The clock had just struck three. The banker was listening. In Ike house
      everyone was asleep, and one could hear only the frozen trees whining
      outside the windows. Trying to make no sound, he took out of his safe the
      key of the door which had not been opened for fifteen years, put on his
      overcoat, and went out of the house. The garden was dark and cold. It was
      raining. A keen damp wind hovered howling over all the garden and gave the
      trees no rest. Though he strained his eyes, the banker could see neither
      the ground, nor the white statues, nor the garden-wing, nor the trees.
      Approaching the place where the garden wing stood, he called the watchman
      twice. There was no answer. Evidently the watchman had taken shelter from
      the bad weather and was now asleep somewhere in the kitchen or the
      greenhouse.
    

      "If I have the courage to fulfil my intention," thought the old man, "the
      suspicion will fall on the watchman first of all."
    

      In the darkness he groped for the stairs and the door and entered the hall
      of the gardenwing, then poked his way into a narrow passage and struck a
      match. Not a soul was there. Someone's bed, with no bedclothes on it,
      stood there, and an iron stove was dark in the corner. The seals on the
      door that led into the prisoner's room were unbroken.
    

      When the match went out, the old man, trembling from agitation, peeped
      into the little window.
    

      In the prisoner's room a candle was burning dim. The prisoner himself sat
      by the table. Only his back, the hair on his head and his hands were
      visible. On the table, the two chairs, the carpet by the table open books
      were strewn.
    

      Five minutes passed and the prisoner never once stirred. Fifteen years
      confinement had taught him to sit motionless. The banker tapped on the
      window with his finger, but the prisoner gave no movement in reply. Then
      the banker cautiously tore the seals from the door and put the key into
      the lock. The rusty lock gave a hoarse groan and the door creaked. The
      banker expected instantly to hear a cry of surprise and the sound of
      steps. Three minutes passed and it was as quiet behind the door as it had
      been before. He made up his mind to enter. Before the table sat a man,
      unlike an ordinary human being. It was a skeleton, with tight-drawn skin,
      with a woman's long curly hair, and a shaggy beard. The colour of his face
      was yellow, of an earthy shade; the cheeks were sunken, the back long and
      narrow, and the hand upon which he leaned his hairy head was so lean and
      skinny that it was painful to look upon. His hair was already silvering
      with grey, and no one who glanced at the senile emaciation of the face
      would have believed that he was only forty years old. On the table, before
      his bended head, lay a sheet of paper on which something was written in a
      tiny hand.
    

      "Poor devil," thought the banker, "he's asleep and probably seeing
      millions in his dreams. I have only to take and throw this half-dead thing
      on the bed, smother him a moment with the pillow, and the most careful
      examination will find no trace of unnatural death. But, first, let us read
      what he has written here."
    

      The banker took the sheet from the table and read:
    

      "To-morrow at twelve o'clock midnight, I shall obtain my freedom and the
      right to mix with people. But before I leave this room and see the sun I
      think it necessary to say a few words to you. On my own clear conscience
      and before God who sees me I declare to you that I despise freedom, life,
      health, and all that your books call the blessings of the world.
    

      "For fifteen years I have diligently studied earthly life. True, I saw
      neither the earth nor the people, but in your books I drank fragrant wine,
      sang songs, hunted deer and wild boar in the forests, loved women.... And
      beautiful women, like clouds ethereal, created by the magic of your poets'
      genius, visited me by night and whispered me wonderful tales, which made
      my head drunken. In your books I climbed the summits of Elbruz and Mont
      Blanc and saw from thence how the sun rose in the morning, and in the
      evening overflowed the sky, the ocean and the mountain ridges with a
      purple gold. I saw from thence how above me lightnings glimmered cleaving
      the clouds; I saw green forests, fields, rivers, lakes, cities; I heard
      syrens singing, and the playing of the pipes of Pan; I touched the wings
      of beautiful devils who came flying to me to speak of God.... In your
      books I cast myself into bottomless abysses, worked miracles, burned
      cities to the ground, preached new religions, conquered whole
      countries....
    

      "Your books gave me wisdom. All that unwearying human thought created in
      the centuries is compressed to a little lump in my skull. I know that I am
      more clever than you all.
    

      "And I despise your books, despise all wordly blessings and wisdom.
      Everything is void, frail, visionary and delusive like a mirage. Though
      you be proud and wise and beautiful, yet will death wipe you from the face
      of the earth like the mice underground; and your posterity, your history,
      and the immortality of your men of genius will be as frozen slag, burnt
      down together with the terrestrial globe.
    

      "You are mad, and gone the wrong way. You take lie for truth and ugliness
      for beauty. You would marvel if by certain conditions there should
      suddenly grow on apple and orange trees, instead of fruit, frogs and
      lizards, and if roses should begin to breathe the odour of a sweating
      horse. So do I marvel at you, who have bartered heaven for earth. I do not
      want to understand you.
    

      "That I may show you in deed my contempt for that by which you live, I
      waive the two millions of which I once dreamed as of paradise, and which I
      now despise. That I may deprive myself of my right to them, I shall come
      out from here five minutes before the stipulated term, and thus shall
      violate the agreement."
    

      When he had read, the banker put the sheet on the table, kissed the head
      of the strange man, and began to weep. He went out of the wing. Never at
      any other time, not even after his terrible losses on the Exchange, had he
      felt such contempt for himself as now. Coming home, he lay down on his
      bed, but agitation and tears kept him long from sleep....
    

      The next morning the poor watchman came running to him and told him that
      they had seen the man who lived in the wing climbing through the window
      into the garden. He had gone to the gate and disappeared. Together with
      his servants the banker went instantly to the wing and established the
      escape of his prisoner. To avoid unnecessary rumours he took the paper
      with the renunciation from the table and, on his return, locked it in his
      safe.
    





      (FROM AN OLD MAN'S JOURNAL)
    

      I
    

      There lives in Russia an emeritus professor, Nicolai Stiepanovich ...
      privy councillor and knight. He has so many Russian and foreign Orders
      that when he puts them on the students call him "the holy picture." His
      acquaintance is most distinguished. Not a single famous scholar lived or
      died during the last twenty-five or thirty years but he was intimately
      acquainted with him. Now he has no one to be friendly with, but speaking
      of the past the long list of his eminent friends would end with such names
      as Pirogov, Kavelin, and the poet Nekrasov, who bestowed upon him their
      warmest and most sincere friendship. He is a member of all the Russian and
      of three foreign universities, et cetera, et cetera. All this, and a great
      deal besides, forms what is known as my name.
    

      This name of mine is very popular. It is known to every literate person in
      Russia; abroad it is mentioned from professorial chairs with the epithets
      "eminent and esteemed." It is reckoned among those fortunate names which
      to mention in vain or to abuse in public or in the Press is considered a
      mark of bad breeding. Indeed, it should be so; because with my name is
      inseparably associated the idea of a famous, richly gifted, and
      indubitably useful person. I am a steady worker, with the endurance of a
      camel, which is important. I am also endowed with talent, which is still
      more important. In passing, I would add that I am a well-educated, modest,
      and honest fellow. I have never poked my nose into letters or politics,
      never sought popularity in disputes with the ignorant, and made no
      speeches either at dinners or at my colleagues' funerals. Altogether there
      is not a single spot on my learned name, and it has nothing to complain
      of. It is fortunate.
    

      The bearer of this name, that is myself, is a man of sixty-two, with a
      bald head, false teeth and an incurable tic. My name is as brilliant and
      prepossessing, as I, myself am dull and ugly. My head and hands tremble
      from weakness; my neck, like that of one of Turgeniev's heroines,
      resembles the handle of a counter-bass; my chest is hollow and my back
      narrow. When I speak or read my mouth twists, and when I smile my whole
      face is covered with senile, deathly wrinkles. There is nothing imposing
      in my pitiable face, save that when I suffer from the tic, I have a
      singular expression which compels anyone who looks at me to think: "This
      man will die soon, for sure."
    

      I can still read pretty well; I can still hold the attention of my
      audience for two hours. My passionate manner, the literary form of my
      exposition and my humour make the defects of my voice almost unnoticeable,
      though it is dry, harsh, and hard like a hypocrite's. But I write badly.
      The part of my brain which governs the ability to write refused office. My
      memory has weakened, and my thoughts are too inconsequent; and when I
      expound them on paper, I always have a feeling that I have lost the sense
      of their organic connection. The construction is monotonous, and the
      sentence feeble and timid. I often do not write what I want to, and when I
      write the end I cannot remember the beginning. I often forget common
      words, and in writing a letter I always have to waste much energy in order
      to avoid superfluous sentences and unnecessary incidental statements; both
      bear clear witness of the decay of my intellectual activity. And it is
      remarkable that, the simpler the letter, the more tormenting is my effort.
      When writing a scientific article I fed much freer and much more
      intelligent than in writing a letter of welcome or a report. One thing
      more: it is easier for me to write German or English than Russian.
    

      As regards my present life, I must first of all note insomnia, from which
      I have begun to suffer lately. If I were asked: "What is now the chief and
      fundamental fact of your existence?" I would answer: "Insomnia." From
      habit, I still undress at midnight precisely and get into bed. I soon fall
      asleep but wake just after one with the feeling that I have not slept at
      all. I must get out of bed and light the lamp. For an hour or two I walk
      about the room from corner to corner and inspect the long familiar
      pictures. When I am weary of walking I sit down to the table. I sit
      motionless thinking of nothing, feeling no desires; if a book lies before
      me I draw it mechanically towards me and read without interest. Thus
      lately in one night I read mechanically a whole novel with a strange
      title, "Of What the Swallow Sang." Or in order to occupy my attention I
      make myself count to a thousand, or I imagine the face of some one of my
      friends, and begin to remember in what year and under what circumstances
      he joined the faculty. I love to listen to sounds. Now, two rooms away
      from me my daughter Liza will say something quickly, in her sleep; then my
      wife will walk through the drawing-room with a candle and infallibly drop
      the box of matches. Then the shrinking wood of the cupboard squeaks or the
      burner of the lamp tinkles suddenly, and all these sounds somehow agitate
      me.
    

      Not to sleep of nights confesses one abnormal; and therefore I wait
      impatiently for the morning and the day, when I have the right not to
      sleep. Many oppressive hours pass before the cock crows. He is my
      harbinger of good. As soon as he has crowed I know that in an hour's time
      the porter downstairs will awake and for some reason or other go up the
      stairs, coughing angrily; and later beyond the windows the air begins to
      pale gradually and voices echo in the street.
    

      The day begins with the coming of my wife. She comes in to me in a
      petticoat, with her hair undone, but already washed and smelling of eau de
      Cologne, and looking as though she came in by accident, saying the same
      thing every time: "Pardon, I came in for a moment. You haven't slept
      again?" Then she puts the lamp out, sits by the table and begins to talk.
      I am not a prophet but I know beforehand what the subject of conversation
      will be, every morning the same. Usually, after breathless inquiries after
      my health, she suddenly remembers our son, the officer, who is serving in
      Warsaw. On the twentieth of each month we send him fifty roubles. This is
      our chief subject of conversation.
    

      "Of course it is hard on us," my wife sighs. "But until he is finally
      settled we are obliged to help him. The boy is among strangers; the pay is
      small. But if you like, next month we'll send him forty roubles instead of
      fifty. What do you think?"
    

      Daily experience might have convinced my wife that expenses do not grow
      less by talking of them. But my wife does not acknowledge experience and
      speaks about our officer punctually every day, about bread, thank Heaven,
      being cheaper and sugar a half-penny dearer—and all this in a tone
      as though it were news to me.
    

      I listen and agree mechanically. Probably because I have not slept during
      the night strange idle thoughts take hold of me. I look at my wife and
      wonder like a child. In perplexity I ask myself: This old, stout, clumsy
      woman, with sordid cares and anxiety about bread and butter written in the
      dull expression of her face, her eyes tired with eternal thoughts of debts
      and poverty, who can talk only of expenses and smile only when things are
      cheap—was this once the slim Varya whom I loved passionately for her
      fine clear mind, her pure soul, her beauty, and as Othello loved
      Desdemona, for her "compassion" of my science? Is she really the same, my
      wife Varya, who bore me a son?
    

      I gaze intently into the fat, clumsy old woman's face. I seek in her my
      Varya; but from the past nothing remains but her fear for my health and
      her way of calling my salary "our" salary and my hat "our" hat. It pains
      me to look at her, and to console her, if only a little, I let her talk as
      she pleases, and I am silent even when she judges people unjustly, or
      scolds me because I do not practise and do not publish text-books.
    

      Our conversation always ends in the same way. My wife suddenly remembers
      that I have not yet had tea, and gives a start:
    

      "Why am I sitting down?" she says, getting up. "The samovar has been on
      the table a long while, and I sit chatting. How forgetful I am? Good
      gracious!"
    

      She hurries away, but stops at the door to say:
    

      "We owe Yegor five months' wages. Do you realise it? It's a bad thing to
      let the servants' wages run on. I've said so often. It's much easier to
      pay ten roubles every month than fifty for five!"
    

      Outside the door she stops again:
    

      "I pity our poor Liza more than anybody. The girl studies at the
      Conservatoire. She's always in good society, and the Lord only knows how
      she's dressed. That fur-coat of hers! It's a sin to show yourself in the
      street in it. If she had a different father, it would do, but everyone
      knows he is a famous professor, a privy councillor."
    

      So, having reproached me for my name and title, she goes away at last.
      Thus begins my day. It does not improve.
    

      When I have drunk my tea, Liza comes in, in a fur-coat and hat, with her
      music, ready to go to the Conservatoire. She is twenty-two. She looks
      younger. She is pretty, rather like my wife when she was young. She kisses
      me tenderly on my forehead and my hand.
    

      "Good morning, Papa. Quite well?"
    

      As a child she adored ice-cream, and I often had to take her to a
      confectioner's. Ice-cream was her standard of beauty. If she wanted to
      praise me, she used to say: "Papa, you are ice-creamy." One finger she
      called the pistachio, the other the cream, the third the raspberry finger
      and so on. And when she came to say good morning, I used to lift her on to
      my knees and kiss her fingers, and say:
    

      "The cream one, the pistachio one, the lemon one."
    

      And now from force of habit I kiss Liza's fingers and murmur:
    

      "Pistachio one, cream one, lemon one." But it does not sound the same. I
      am cold like the ice-cream and I feel ashamed. When my daughter comes in
      and touches my forehead with her lips I shudder as though a bee had stung
      my forehead, I smile constrainedly and turn away my face. Since my
      insomnia began a question has been driving like a nail into my brain. My
      daughter continually sees how terribly I, an old man, blush because I owe
      the servant his wages; she sees how often the worry of small debts forces
      me to leave my work and to pace the room from corner to corner for hours,
      thinking; but why hasn't she, even once, come to me without telling her
      mother and whispered: "Father, here's my watch, bracelets, earrings,
      dresses.... Pawn them all.... You need money"? Why, seeing how I and her
      mother try to hide our poverty, out of false pride—why does she not
      deny herself the luxury of music lessons? I would not accept the watch,
      the bracelets, or her sacrifices—God forbid!—I do not want
      that.
    

      Which reminds me of my son, the Warsaw officer. He is a clever, honest,
      and sober fellow. But that doesn't mean very much. If I had an old father,
      and I knew that there were moments when he was ashamed of his poverty, I
      think I would give up my commission to someone else and hire myself out as
      a navvy. These thoughts of the children poison me. What good are they?
      Only a mean and irritable person Can take refuge in thinking evil of
      ordinary people because they are not heroes. But enough of that.
    

      At a quarter to ten I have to go and lecture to my dear boys. I dress
      myself and walk the road I have known these thirty years. For me it has a
      history of its own. Here is a big grey building with a chemist's shop
      beneath. A tiny house once stood there, and it was a beer-shop. In this
      beer-shop I thought out my thesis, and wrote my first love-letter to
      Varya. I wrote it in pencil on a scrap of paper that began "Historia
      Morbi." Here is a grocer's shop. It used to belong to a little Jew who
      sold me cigarettes on credit, and later on to a fat woman who loved
      students "because every one of them had a mother." Now a red-headed
      merchant sits there, a very nonchalant man, who drinks tea from a copper
      tea-pot. And here are the gloomy gates of the University that have not
      been repaired for years; a weary porter in a sheepskin coat, a broom,
      heaps of snow ... Such gates cannot produce a good impression on a boy who
      comes fresh from the provinces and imagines that the temple of science is
      really a temple. Certainly, in the history of Russian pessimism, the age
      of university buildings, the dreariness of the corridors, the smoke-stains
      on the walls, the meagre light, the dismal appearance of the stairs, the
      clothes-pegs and the benches, hold one of the foremost places in the
      series of predisposing causes. Here is our garden. It does not seem to
      have grown any better or any worse since I was a student. I do not like
      it. It would be much more sensible if tall pine-trees and fine oaks grew
      there instead of consumptive lime-trees, yellow acacias and thin clipped
      lilac. The student's mood is created mainly by every one of the
      surroundings in which he studies; therefore he must see everywhere before
      him only what is great and strong and exquisite. Heaven preserve him from
      starveling trees, broken windows, and drab walls and doors covered with
      tom oilcloth.
    

      As I approach my main staircase the door is open wide. I am met by my old
      friend, of the same age and name as I, Nicolas the porter. He grunts as he
      lets me in:
    

      "It's frosty, Your Excellency."
    

      Or if my coat is wet:
    

      "It's raining a bit, Your Excellency."
    

      Then he runs in front of me and opens all the doors on my way. In the
      study he carefully takes off my coat and at the same time manages to tell
      me some university news. Because of the close acquaintance that exists
      between all the University porters and keepers, he knows all that happens
      in the four faculties, in the registry, in the chancellor's cabinet, and
      the library. He knows everything. When, for instance, the resignation of
      the rector or dean is under discussion, I hear him talking to the junior
      porters, naming candidates and explaining offhand that so and so will not
      be approved by the Minister, so and so will himself refuse the honour;
      then he plunges into fantastic details of some mysterious papers received
      in the registry, of a secret conversation which appears to have taken
      place between the Minister and the curator, and so on. These details
      apart, he is almost always right. The impressions he forms of each
      candidate are original, but also true. If you want to know who read his
      thesis, joined the staff, resigned or died in a particular year, then you
      must seek the assistance of this veteran's colossal memory. He will not
      only name you the year, month, and day, but give you the accompanying
      details of this or any other event. Such memory is the privilege of love.
    

      He is the guardian of the university traditions. From the porters before
      him he inherited many legends of the life of the university. He added to
      this wealth much of his own and if you like he will tell you many stories,
      long or short. He can tell you of extraordinary savants who knew everything,
      of remarkable scholars who did not sleep for weeks on end, of numberless
      martyrs to science; good triumphs over evil with him. The weak always
      conquer the strong, the wise man the fool, the modest the proud, the young
      the old. There is no need to take all these legends and stories for
      sterling; but filter them, and you will find what you want in your filter,
      a noble tradition and the names of true heroes acknowledged by all.
    

      In our society all the information about the learned world consists
      entirely of anecdotes of the extraordinary absent-mindedness of old
      professors, and of a handful of jokes, which are ascribed to Guber or to
      myself or to Baboukhin. But this is too little for an educated society. If
      it loved science, savants and students as Nicolas loves them, it would
      long ago have had a literature of whole epics, stories, and biographies.
      But unfortunately this is yet to be.
    

      The news told, Nicolas looks stem and we begin to talk business. If an
      outsider were then to hear how freely Nicolas uses the jargon, he would be
      inclined to think that he was a scholar, posing as a soldier. By the way,
      the rumours of the university-porter's erudition are very exaggerated. It
      is true that Nicolas knows more than a hundred Latin tags, can put a
      skeleton together and on occasion make a preparation, can make the
      students laugh with a long learned quotation, but the simple theory of the
      circulation of the blood is as dark to him now as it was twenty years ago.
    

      At the table in my room, bent low over a book or a preparation, sits my
      dissector, Peter Ignatievich. He is a hardworking, modest man of
      thirty-five without any gifts, already bald and with a big belly. He works
      from morning to night, reads tremendously and remembers everything he has
      read. In this respect he is not merely an excellent man, but a man of
      gold; but in all others he is a cart-horse, or if you like a learned
      blockhead. The characteristic traits of a cart-horse which distinguish him
      from a creature of talent are these. His outlook is narrow, absolutely
      bounded by his specialism. Apart from his own subject he is as naive as a
      child. I remember once entering the room and saying:
    

      "Think what bad luck! They say, Skobielev is dead."
    

      Nicolas crossed himself; but Peter Ignatievich turned to me:
    

      "Which Skobielev do you mean?"
    

      Another time,—some time earlier—I announced that Professor
      Pierov was dead. That darling Peter Ignatievich asked:
    

      "What was his subject?"
    

      I imagine that if Patti sang into his ear, or Russia were attacked by
      hordes of Chinamen, or there was an earthquake, he would not lift a
      finger, but would go on in the quietest way with his eye screwed over his
      microscope. In a word: "What's Hecuba to him?" I would give anything to
      see how this dry old stick goes to bed with his wife.
    

      Another trait: a fanatical belief in the infallibility of science, above
      all in everything that the Germans write. He is sure of himself and his
      preparations, knows the purpose of life, is absolutely ignorant of the
      doubts and disillusionments that turn talents grey,—a slavish
      worship of the authorities, and not a shadow of need to think for himself.
      It is hard to persuade him and quite impossible to discuss with him. Just
      try a discussion with a man who is profoundly convinced that the best
      science is medicine, the best men doctors, the best traditions—the
      medical! From the ugly past of medicine only one tradition has survived,—the
      white necktie that doctors wear still. For a learned, and more generally
      for an educated person there can exist only a general university
      tradition, without any division into traditions of medicine, of law, and
      so on. But it's quite impossible for Peter Ignatievich to agree with that;
      and he is ready to argue it with you till doomsday.
    

      His future is quite plain to me. During the whole of his life he will make
      several hundred preparations of extraordinary purity, will write any
      number of dry, quite competent, essays, will make about ten scrupulously
      accurate translations; but he won't invent gunpowder. For gunpowder,
      imagination is wanted, inventiveness, and a gift for divination, and Peter
      Ignatievich has nothing of the kind. In short, he is not a master of
      science but a labourer.
    

      Peter Ignatievich, Nicolas, and I whisper together. We are rather strange
      to ourselves. One feels something quite particular, when the audience
      booms like the sea behind the door. In thirty years I have not grown used
      to this feeling, and I have it every morning. I button up my frock-coat
      nervously, ask Nicolas unnecessary questions, get angry.... It is as
      though I were afraid; but it is not fear, but something else which I
      cannot name nor describe.
    

      Unnecessarily, I look at my watch and say:
    

      "Well, it's time to go."
    

      And we march in, in this order: Nicolas with the preparations or the
      atlases in front, myself next, and after me, the cart-horse, modestly
      hanging his head; or, if necessary, a corpse on a stretcher in front and
      behind the corpse Nicolas and so on. The students rise when I appear, then
      sit down and the noise of the sea is suddenly still. Calm begins.
    

      I know what I will lecture about, but I know nothing of how I will
      lecture, where I will begin and where I will end. There is not a single
      sentence ready in my brain. But as soon as I glance at the audience,
      sitting around me in an amphitheatre, and utter the stereotyped "In our
      last lecture we ended with...." and the sentences fly out of my soul in a
      long line—then it is full steam ahead. I speak with irresistible
      speed, and with passion, and it seems as though no earthly power could
      check the current of my speech. In order to lecture well, that is without
      being wearisome and to the listener's profit, besides talent you must have
      the knack of it and experience; you must have a clear idea both of your
      own powers, of the people to whom you are lecturing, and of the subject of
      your remarks. Moreover, you must be quick in the uptake, keep a sharp eye
      open, and never for a moment lose your field of vision.
    

      When he presents the composer's thought, a good conductor does twenty
      things at once. He reads the score, waves his baton, watches the singer
      makes a gesture now towards the drum, now to the double-bass, and so on.
      It is the same with me when lecturing. I have some hundred and fifty faces
      before me, quite unlike each other, and three hundred eyes staring me
      straight in the face. My purpose is to conquer this many-headed hydra. If
      I have a clear idea how far they are attending and how much they are
      comprehending every minute while I am lecturing, then the hydra is in my
      power. My other opponent is within me. This is the endless variety of
      forms, phenomena and laws, and the vast number of ideas, whether my own or
      others', which depend upon them. Every moment I must be skilful enough to
      choose what is most important and necessary from this enormous material,
      and just as swiftly as my speech flows to clothe my thought in a form
      which will penetrate the hydra's understanding and excite its attention.
      Besides I must watch carefully to see that my thoughts shall not be
      presented as they have been accumulated, but in a certain order, necessary
      for the correct composition of the picture which I wish to paint. Further,
      I endeavour to make my speech literary, my definitions brief and exact, my
      sentences as simple and elegant as possible. Every moment I must hold
      myself in and remember that I have only an hour and forty minutes to
      spend. In other words, it is a heavy labour. At one and the same time you
      have to be a savant, a schoolmaster, and an orator, and it is a failure if
      the orator triumphs over the schoolmaster in you or the schoolmaster over
      the orator.
    

      After lecturing for a quarter, for half an hour, I notice suddenly that
      the students have begun to stare at the ceiling or Peter Ignatievich. One
      will feel for his handkerchief, another settle himself comfortably,
      another smile at his own thoughts. This means their attention is tried. I
      must take steps. I seize the first opening and make a pun. All the hundred
      and fifty faces have a broad smile, their eyes flash merrily, and for a
      while you can hear the boom of the sea. I laugh too. Their attention is
      refreshed and I can go on.
    

      No sport, no recreation, no game ever gave me such delight as reading a
      lecture. Only in a lecture could I surrender myself wholly to passion and
      understand that inspiration is not a poet's fiction, but exists indeed.
      And I do not believe that Hercules, even after the most delightful of his
      exploits, felt such a pleasant weariness as I experienced every time after
      a lecture.
    

      This was in the past. Now at lectures I experience only torture. Not half
      an hour passes before I begin to feel an invincible weakness in my legs
      and shoulders. I sit down in my chair, but I am not used to lecture
      sitting. In a moment I am up again, and lecture standing. Then I sit down
      again. Inside my mouth is dry, my voice is hoarse, my head feels dizzy. To
      hide my state from my audience I drink some water now and then, cough,
      wipe my nose continually, as though I was troubled by a cold, make
      inopportune puns, and finally announce the interval earlier than I should.
      But chiefly I feel ashamed.
    

      Conscience and reason tell me that the best thing I could do now is to
      read my farewell lecture to the boys, give them my last word, bless them
      and give up my place to someone younger and stronger than I. But, heaven
      be my judge, I have not the courage to act up to my conscience.
    

      Unfortunately, I am neither philosopher nor theologian. I know quite well
      I have no more than six months to live; and it would seem that now I ought
      to be mainly occupied with questions of the darkness beyond the grave, and
      the visions which will visit my sleep in the earth. But somehow my soul is
      not curious of these questions, though my mind grants every atom of their
      importance. Now before my death it is just as it was twenty or thirty
      years ago. Only science interests me.—When I take my last breath I
      shall still believe that Science is the most important, the most
      beautiful, the most necessary thing in the life of man; that she has
      always been and always will be the highest manifestation of love, and that
      by her alone will man triumph over nature and himself. This faith is,
      perhaps, at bottom naive and unfair, but I am not to blame if this and not
      another is my faith. To conquer this faith within me is for me impossible.
    

      But this is beside the point. I only ask that you should incline to my
      weakness and understand that to tear a man who is more deeply concerned
      with the destiny of a brain tissue than the final goal of creation away
      from his rostrum and his students is like taking him and nailing him up in
      a coffin without waiting until he is dead.
    

      Because of my insomnia and the intense struggle with my increasing
      weakness a strange thing happens inside me. In the middle of my lecture
      tears rise to my throat, my eyes begin to ache, and I have a passionate
      and hysterical desire to stretch out my hands and moan aloud. I want to
      cry out that fate has doomed me, a famous man, to death; that in some six
      months here in the auditorium another will be master. I want to cry out
      that I am poisoned; that new ideas that I did not know before have
      poisoned the last days of my life, and sting my brain incessantly like
      mosquitoes. At that moment my position seems so terrible to me that I want
      all my students to be terrified, to jump from their seats and rush
      panic-stricken to the door, shrieking in despair.
    

      It is not easy to live through such moments.
    


      II
    

      After the lecture I sit at home and work. I read reviews, dissertations,
      or prepare for the next lecture, and sometimes I write something. I work
      with interruptions, since I have to receive visitors.
    

      The bell rings. It is a friend who has come to talk over some business. He
      enters with hat and stick. He holds them both in front of him and says:
    

      "Just a minute, a minute. Sit down, cher confrÃ¨re. Only a word or two."
    

      First we try to show each other that we are both extraordinarily polite
      and very glad to see each other. I make him sit down in the chair, and he
      makes me sit down; and then we touch each other's waists, and put our
      hands on each other's buttons, as though we were feeling each other and
      afraid to bum ourselves. We both laugh, though we say nothing funny.
      Sitting down, we bend our heads together and begin to whisper to each
      other. We must gild our conversation with such Chinese formalities as:
      "You remarked most justly" or "I have already had the occasion to say." We
      must giggle if either of us makes a pun, though it's a bad one. When we
      have finished with the business, my friend gets up with a rush, waves his
      hat towards my work, and begins to take his leave. We feel each other once
      more and laugh. I accompany him down to the hall. There I help my friend
      on with his coat, but he emphatically declines so great an honour. Then,
      when Yegor opens the door my friend assures me that I will catch cold, and
      I pretend to be ready to follow him into the street. And when I finally
      return to my study my face keeps smiling still, it must be from inertia.
    

      A little later another ring. Someone enters the hall, spends a long time
      taking off his coat and coughs. Yegor brings me word that a student has
      come. I tell him to show him up. In a minute a pleasant-faced young man
      appears. For a year we have been on these forced terms together. He sends
      in abominable answers at examinations, and I mark him gamma. Every year I
      have about seven of these people to whom, to use the students' slang, "I
      give a plough" or "haul them through." Those of them who fail because of
      stupidity or illness, usually bear their cross in patience and do not
      bargain with me; only sanguine temperaments, "open natures," bargain with
      me and come to my house, people whose appetite is spoiled or who are
      prevented from going regularly to the opera by a delay in their
      examinations. With the first I am over-indulgent; the second kind I keep
      on the run for a year.
    

      "Sit down," I say to my guest. "What was it you wished to say?"
    

      "Forgive me for troubling you, Professor...." he begins, stammering and
      never looking me in the face. "I would not venture to trouble you
      unless.... I was up for my examination before you for the fifth time ...
      and I failed. I implore you to be kind, and give me a 'satis,'
      because...."
    

      The defence which all idlers make of themselves is always the same. They
      have passed in every other subject with distinction, and failed only in
      mine, which is all the more strange because they had always studied my
      subject most diligently and know it thoroughly. They failed through some
      inconceivable misunderstanding.
    

      "Forgive me, my friend," I say to my guest. "But I can't give you a
      'satis'—impossible. Go and read your lectures again, and then come.
      Then we'll see."
    

      Pause. I get a desire to torment the student a little, because he prefers
      beer and the opera to science; and I say with a sigh:
    

      "In my opinion, the best thing for you now is to give up the Faculty of
      Medicine altogether. With your abilities, if you find it impossible to
      pass the examination, then it seems you have neither the desire nor the
      vocation to be a doctor."
    

      My sanguine friend's face grows grave.
    

      "Excuse me, Professor," he smiles, "but it would be strange, to say the
      least, on my part. Studying medicine for five years and suddenly—to
      throw it over."
    

      "Yes, but it's better to waste five years than to spend your whole life
      afterwards in an occupation which you dislike."
    

      Immediately I begin to feel sorry for him and hasten to say:
    

      "Well, do as you please. Read a little and come again."
    

      "When?" the idler asks, dully.
    

      "Whenever you like. To-morrow, even."
    

      And I read in his pleasant eyes. "I can come again; but you'll send me
      away again, you beast."
    

      "Of course," I say, "you won't become more learned because you have to
      come up to me fifteen times for examination; but this will form your
      character. You must be thankful for that."
    

      Silence. I rise and wait for my guest to leave. But he stands there,
      looking at the window, pulling at his little beard and thinking. It
      becomes tedious.
    

      My sanguine friend has a pleasant, succulent voice, clever, amusing eyes,
      a good-natured face, rather puffed by assiduity to beer and much resting
      on the sofa. Evidently he could tell me many interesting things about the
      opera, about his love affairs, about the friends he adores; but,
      unfortunately, it is not the thing. And I would so eagerly listen!
    

      "On my word of honour, Professor, if you give me a 'satis' I'll...."
    

      As soon as it gets to "my word of honour," I wave my hands and sit down to
      the table. The student thinks for a while and says, dejectedly:
    

      "In that case, good-bye.... Forgive me!"
    

      "Good-bye, my friend.... Good-bye!"
    

      He walks irresolutely into the hall, slowly puts on his coat, and, when he
      goes into the street, probably thinks again for a long while; having
      excogitated nothing better than "old devil" for me, he goes to a cheap
      restaurant to drink beer and dine, and then home to sleep. Peace be to
      your ashes, honest labourer!
    

      A third ring. Enters a young doctor in a new black suit, gold-rimmed
      spectacles and the inevitable white necktie. He introduces himself. I ask
      him to take a seat and inquire his business. The young priest of science
      begins to tell me, not without agitation, that he passed his doctor's
      examination this year, and now has only to write his dissertation. He
      would like to work with me, under my guidance; and I would do him a great
      kindness if I would suggest a subject for his dissertation.
    

      "I should be delighted to be of use to you, mon cher confrÃ¨re," I say.
      "But first of all, let us come to an agreement as to what is a
      dissertation. Generally we understand by this, work produced as the result
      of an independent creative power. Isn't that so? But a work written on
      another's subject, under another's guidance, has a different name."
    

      The aspirant is silent. I fire up and jump out of my seat. "Why do you all
      come to me? I can't understand," I cry out angrily. "Do I keep a shop? I
      don't sell theses across the counter. For the one thousandth time I ask
      you all to leave me alone. Forgive my rudeness, but I've got tired of it
      at last!"
    

      The aspirant is silent. Only, a tinge of colour shows on his cheek. His
      face expresses his profound respect for my famous name and my erudition,
      but I see in his eyes that he despises my voice, my pitiable figure, my
      nervous gestures. When I am angry I seem to him a very queer fellow.
    

      "I do not keep a shop," I storm. "It's an amazing business! Why don't you
      want to be independent? Why do you find freedom so objectionable?"
    

      I say a great deal, but he is silent. At last by degrees I grow calm, and,
      of course, surrender. The aspirant will receive a valueless subject from
      me, will write under my observation a needless thesis, will pass his
      tedious disputation cum laude and will get a useless and learned
      degree.
    

      The rings follow in endless succession, but here I confine myself to four.
      The fourth ring sounds, and I hear the familiar steps, the rustling dress,
      the dear voice.
    

      Eighteen years ago my dear friend, the oculist, died and left behind him a
      seven year old daughter, Katy, and sixty thousand roubles. By his will he
      made me guardian. Katy lived in my family till she was ten. Afterwards she
      was sent to College and lived with me only in her holidays in the summer
      months. I had no time to attend to her education. I watched only by fits
      and starts; so that I can say very little about her childhood.
    

      The chief thing I remember, the one I love to dwell upon in memory, is the
      extraordinary confidence which she had when she entered my house, when she
      had to have the doctor,—a confidence which was always shining in her
      darling face. She would sit in a corner somewhere with her face tied up,
      and would be sure to be absorbed in watching something. Whether she was
      watching me write and read books, or my wife bustling about, or the cook
      peeling the potatoes in the kitchen or the dog playing about—her
      eyes invariably expressed the same thing: "Everything that goes on in this
      world,—everything is beautiful and clever." She was inquisitive and
      adored to talk to me. She would sit at the table opposite me, watching my
      movements and asking questions. She is interested to know what I read,
      what I do at the University, if I'm not afraid of corpses, what I do with
      my money.
    

      "Do the students fight at the University?" she would ask.
    

      "They do, my dear."
    

      "You make them go down on their knees?"
    

      "I do."
    

      And it seemed funny to her that the students fought and that I made them
      go down on their knees, and she laughed. She was a gentle, good, patient
      child.
    

      Pretty often I happened to see how something was taken away from her, or
      she was unjustly punished, or her curiosity was not satisfied. At such
      moments sadness would be added to her permanent expression of confidence—nothing
      more. I didn't know how to take her part, but when I saw her sadness, I
      always had the desire to draw her close to me and comfort her in an old
      nurse's voice: "My darling little orphan!"
    

      I remember too she loved to be well dressed and to sprinkle herself with
      scents. In this she was like me. I also love good clothes and fine scents.
    

      I regret that I had neither the time nor the inclination to watch the
      beginnings and the growth of the passion which had completely taken hold
      of Katy when she was no more than fourteen or fifteen. I mean her
      passionate love for the theatre. When she used to come from the College
      for her holidays and live with us, nothing gave her such pleasure and
      enthusiasm to talk about as plays and actors. She used to tire us with her
      incessant conversation about the theatre. I alone hadn't the courage to
      deny her my attention. My wife and children did not listen to her. When
      she felt the desire to share her raptures she would come to my study and
      coax: "Nicolai Stiepanich, do let me speak to you about the theatre."
    

      I used to show her the time and say:
    

      "I'll give you half an hour. Fire away!"
    

      Later on she used to bring in pictures of the actors and actresses she
      worshipped—whole dozens of them. Then several times she tried to
      take part in amateur theatricals, and finally when she left College she
      declared to me she was born to be an actress.
    

      I never shared Katy's enthusiasms for the theatre. My opinion is that if a
      play is good then there's no need to trouble the actors for it to make the
      proper impression; you can be satisfied merely by reading it. If the play
      is bad, no acting will make it good.
    

      When I was young I often went to the theatre, and nowadays my family takes
      a box twice a year and carries me off for an airing there. Of course this
      is not enough to give me the right to pass verdicts on the theatre; but I
      will say a few words about it. In my opinion the theatre hasn't improved
      in the last thirty or forty years. I can't find any more than I did then,
      a glass of dean water, either in the corridors or the foyer. Just as they
      did then, the attendants fine me sixpence for my coat, though there's
      nothing illegal in wearing a warm coat in winter. Just as it did then, the
      orchestra plays quite unnecessarily in the intervals, and adds a new,
      gratuitous impression to the one received from the play. Just as they did
      then, men go to the bar in the intervals and drink spirits. If there is no
      perceptible improvement in little things, it will be useless to look for
      it in the bigger things. When an actor, hide-bound in theatrical
      traditions and prejudices, tries to read simple straightforward monologue:
      "To be or not to be," not at all simply, but with an incomprehensible and
      inevitable hiss and convulsions over his whole body, or when he tries to
      convince me that Chazky, who is always talking to fools and is in love
      with a fool, is a very clever man and that "The Sorrows of Knowledge" is
      not a boring play,—then I get from the stage a breath of the same
      old routine that exasperated me forty years ago when I was regaled with
      classical lamentation and beating on the breast. Every time I come out of
      the theatre a more thorough conservative than I went in.
    

      It's quite possible to convince the sentimental, self-confident crowd that
      the theatre in its present state is an education. But not a man who knows
      what true education is would swallow this. I don't know what it may be in
      fifty or a hundred years, but under present conditions the theatre can
      only be a recreation. But the recreation is too expensive for continual
      use, and robs the country of thousands of young, healthy, gifted men and
      women, who if they had not devoted themselves to the theatre would be
      excellent doctors, farmers, schoolmistresses, or officers. It robs the
      public of its evenings, the best time for intellectual work and friendly
      conversation. I pass over the waste of money and the moral injuries to the
      spectator when he sees murder, adultery, or slander wrongly treated on the
      stage.
    

      But Katy's opinion was quite the opposite. She assured me that even in its
      present state the theatre is above lecture-rooms and books, above
      everything else in the world. The theatre is a power that unites in itself
      all the arts, and the actors are men with a mission. No separate art or
      science can act on the human soul so strongly and truly as the stage; and
      therefore it is reasonable that a medium actor should enjoy much greater
      popularity than the finest scholar or painter. No public activity can give
      such delight and satisfaction as the theatrical.
    

      So one fine day Katy joined a theatrical company and went away, I believe,
      to Ufa, taking with her a lot of money, a bagful of rainbow hopes, and
      some very high-class views on the business.
    

      Her first letters on the journey were wonderful. When I read them I was
      simply amazed that little sheets of paper could contain so much youth,
      such transparent purity, such divine innocence, and at the same time so
      many subtle, sensible judgments, that would do honour to a sound masculine
      intelligence. The Volga, nature, the towns she visited, her friends, her
      successes and failures—she did not write about them, she sang. Every
      line breathed the confidence which I used to see in her face; and with all
      this a mass of grammatical mistakes and hardly a single stop.
    

      Scarce six months passed before I received a highly poetical enthusiastic
      letter, beginning, "I have fallen in love." She enclosed a photograph of a
      young man with a clean-shaven face, in a broad-brimmed hat, with a plaid
      thrown over his shoulders. The next letters were just as splendid, but
      stops already began to appear and the grammatical mistakes to vanish. They
      had a strong masculine scent. Katy began to write about what a good thing
      it would be to build a big theatre somewhere in the Volga, but on a
      cooperative basis, and to attract the rich business-men and shipowners to
      the undertaking. There would be plenty of money, huge receipts, and the
      actors would work in partnership.... Perhaps all this is really a good
      thing, but I can't help thinking such schemes could only come from a man's
      head.
    

      Anyhow for eighteen months or a couple of years everything seemed to be
      all right. Katy was in love, had her heart in her business and was happy.
      But later on I began to notice dear symptoms of a decline in her letters.
      It began with Katy complaining about her friends. This is the first and
      most ominous sign. If a young scholar or litterateur begins his career by
      complaining bitterly about other scholars or littÃ©rateurs, it means that
      he is tired already and not fit for his business. Katy wrote to me that
      her friends would not come to rehearsals and never knew their parts; that
      they showed an utter contempt for the public in the absurd plays they
      staged and the manner they behaved. To swell the box-office receipts—the
      only topic of conversation—serious actresses degrade themselves by
      singing sentimentalities, and tragic actors sing music-hall songs,
      laughing at husbands who are deceived and unfaithful wives who are
      pregnant. In short, it was amazing that the profession, in the provinces,
      was not absolutely dead. The marvel was that it could exist at all with
      such thin, rotten blood in its veins.
    

      In reply I sent Katy a long and, I confess, a very tedious letter. Among
      other things I wrote: "I used to talk fairly often to actors in the past,
      men of the noblest character, who honoured me with their friendship. From
      my conversations with them I understood that their activities were guided
      rather by the whim and fashion of society than by the free working of
      their own minds. The best of them in their lifetime had to play in
      tragedy, in musical comedy, in French farce, and in pantomime; yet all
      through they considered that they were treading the right path and being
      useful. You see that this means that you must look for the cause of the
      evil, not in the actors, but deeper down, in the art itself and the
      attitude of society towards it." This letter of mine only made Katy cross.
      "You and I are playing in different operas. I didn't write to you about
      men of the noblest character, but about a lot of sharks who haven't a
      spark of nobility in them. They are a horde of savages who came on the
      stage only because they wouldn't be allowed anywhere else. The only ground
      they have for calling themselves artists is their impudence. Not a single
      talent among them, but any number of incapables, drunkards, intriguers,
      and slanderers. I can't tell you how bitterly I feel it that the art I
      love so much is fallen into the hands of people I despise. It hurts me
      that the best men should be content to look at evil from a distance and
      not want to come nearer. Instead of taking an active part, they write
      ponderous platitudes and useless sermons...." and more in the same strain.
    

      A little while after I received the following: "I have been inhumanly
      deceived. I can't go on living any more. Do as you think fit with my
      money. I loved you as a father and as my only friend. Forgive me."
    

      So it appeared that he too belonged to the horde of savages. Later
      on, I gathered from various hints, that there was an attempt at suicide.
      Apparently, Katy tried to poison herself. I think she must have been
      seriously ill afterwards, for I got the following letter from Yalta, where
      most probably the doctors had sent her. Her last letter to me contained a
      request that I should send her at Yalta a thousand roubles, and it ended
      with the words: "Forgive me for writing such a sad letter. I buried my
      baby yesterday." After she had spent about a year in the Crimea she
      returned home.
    

      She had been travelling for about four years, and during these four years
      I confess that I occupied a strange and unenviable position in regard to
      her. When she announced to me that she was going on to the stage and
      afterwards wrote to me about her love; when the desire to spend took hold
      of her, as it did periodically, and I had to send her every now and then
      one or two thousand roubles at her request; when she wrote that she
      intended to die, and afterwards that her baby was dead,—-I was at a
      loss every time. All my sympathy with her fate consisted in thinking hard
      and writing long tedious letters which might as well never have been
      written. But then I was in loco parentis and I loved her as a
      daughter.
    

      Katy lives half a mile away from me now. She took a five-roomed house and
      furnished it comfortably, with the taste that was born in her. If anyone
      were to undertake to depict her surroundings, then the dominating mood of
      the picture would be indolence. Soft cushions, soft chairs for her
      indolent body; carpets for her indolent feet; faded, dim, dull colours for
      her indolent eyes; for her indolent soul, a heap of cheap fans and tiny
      pictures on the walls, pictures in which novelty of execution was more
      noticeable than content; plenty of little tables and stands, set out with
      perfectly useless and worthless things, shapeless scraps instead of
      curtains.... All this, combined with a horror of bright colours, of
      symmetry, and space, betokened a perversion of the natural taste as well
      as indolence of the soul. For whole days Katy lies on the sofa and reads
      books, mostly novels and stories. She goes outside her house but once in
      the day, to come and see me.
    

      I work. Katy sits on the sofa at my side. She is silent, and wraps herself
      up in her shawl as though she were cold. Either because she is sympathetic
      to me, or I because I had got used to her continual visits while she was
      still a little girl, her presence does not prevent me from concentrating
      on my work. At long intervals I ask her some question or other,
      mechanically, and she answers very curtly; or, for a moment's rest, I turn
      towards her and watch how she is absorbed in looking through some medical
      review or newspaper. And then I see that the old expression of confidence
      in her face is there no more. Her expression now is cold, indifferent,
      distracted, like that of a passenger who has to wait a long while for his
      train. She dresses as she used—well and simply, but carelessly.
      Evidently her clothes and her hair suffer not a little from the sofas and
      hammocks on which she lies for days together. And she is not curious any
      more. She doesn't ask me questions any more, as if she had experienced
      everything in life and did not expect to hear anything new.
    

      About four o'clock there is a sound of movement in the hall and the
      drawing-room. It's Liza come back from the Conservatoire, bringing her
      friends with her. You can hear them playing the piano, trying their voices
      and giggling. Yegor is laying the table in the dining-room and making a
      noise with the plates.
    

      "Good-bye," says Katy. "I shan't go in to see your people. They must
      excuse me. I haven't time. Come and see me."
    

      When I escort her into the hall, she looks me over sternly from head to
      foot, and says in vexation:
    

      "You get thinner and thinner. Why don't you take a cure? I'll go to
      Sergius Fiodorovich and ask him to come. You must let him see you."
    

      "It's not necessary, Katy."
    

      "I can't understand why your family does nothing. They're a nice lot."
    

      She puts on her jacket with her rush. Inevitably, two or three hair-pins
      fall out of her careless hair on to the floor. It's too much bother to
      tidy her hair now; besides she is in a hurry. She pushes the straggling
      strands of hair untidily under her hat and goes away.
    

      As soon as I come into the dining-room, my wife asks:
    

      "Was that Katy with you just now? Why didn't she come to see us. It really
      is extraordinary...."
    

      "Mamma!" says Liza reproachfully, "If she doesn't want to come, that's her
      affair. There's no need for us to go on our knees."
    

      "Very well; but it's insulting. To sit in the study for three hours,
      without thinking of us. But she can do as she likes."
    

      Varya and Liza both hate Katy. This hatred is unintelligible to me;
      probably you have to be a woman to understand it. I'll bet my life on it
      that you'll hardly find a single one among the hundred and fifty young men
      I see almost every day in my audience, or the hundred old ones I happen to
      meet every week, who would be able to understand why women hate and abhor
      Katy's past, her being pregnant and unmarried and her illegitimate child.
      Yet at the same time I cannot bring to mind a single woman or girl of my
      acquaintance who would not cherish such feelings, either consciously or
      instinctively. And it's not because women are purer and more virtuous than
      men. If virtue and purity are not free from evil feeling, there's precious
      little difference between them and vice. I explain it simply by the
      backward state of women's development. The sorrowful sense of compassion
      and the torment of conscience, which the modern man experiences when he
      sees distress have much more to tell me about culture and moral
      development than have hatred and repulsion. The modern woman is as
      lachrymose and as coarse in heart as she was in the middle ages. And in my
      opinion those who advise her to be educated like a man have wisdom on
      their side.
    

      But still my wife does not like Katy, because she was an actress, and for
      her ingratitude, her pride, her extravagances, and all the innumerable
      vices one woman can always discover in another.
    

      Besides myself and my family we have two or three of my daughter's girl
      friends to dinner and Alexander Adolphovich Gnekker, Liza's admirer and
      suitor. He is a fair young man, not more than thirty years old, of middle
      height, very fat, broad shouldered, with reddish hair round his ears and a
      little stained moustache, which give his smooth chubby face the look of a
      doll's. He wears a very short jacket, a fancy waistcoat, large-striped
      trousers, very full on the hip and very narrow in the leg, and brown boots
      without heels. His eyes stick out like a lobster's, his tie is like a
      lobster's tail, and I can't help thinking even that the smell of lobster
      soup clings about the whole of this young man. He visits us every day; but
      no one in the family knows where he comes from, where he was educated, or
      how he lives. He cannot play or sing, but he has a certain connection with
      music as well as singing, for he is agent for somebody's pianos, and is
      often at the Academy. He knows all the celebrities, and he manages
      concerts. He gives his opinion on music with great authority and I have
      noticed that everybody hastens to agree with him.
    

      Rich men always have parasites about them. So do the sciences and the
      arts. It seems that there is no science or art in existence, which is free
      from such "foreign bodies" as this Mr. Gnekker. I am not a musician and
      perhaps I am mistaken about Gnekker, besides I don't know him very well.
      But I can't help suspecting the authority and dignity with which he stands
      beside the piano and listens when anyone is singing or playing.
    

      You may be a gentleman and a privy councillor a hundred times over; but if
      you have a daughter you can't be guaranteed against the pettinesses that
      are so often brought into your house and into your own humour, by
      courtings, engagements, and weddings. For instance, I cannot reconcile
      myself to my wife's solemn expression every time Gnekker comes to our
      house, nor to those bottles of ChÃ¢teau Lafitte, port, and sherry which are
      put on the table only for him, to convince him beyond doubt of the
      generous luxury in which we live. Nor can I stomach the staccato laughter
      which Liza learned at the Academy, and her way of screwing up her eyes,
      when men are about the house. Above all, I can't understand why it is that
      such a creature should come to me every day and have dinner with me—a
      creature perfectly foreign to my habits, my science, and the whole tenour
      of my life, a creature absolutely unlike the men I love. My wife and the
      servants whisper mysteriously that that is "the bridegroom," but still I
      can't understand why he's there. It disturbs my mind just as much as if a
      Zulu were put next to me at table. Besides, it seems strange to me that my
      daughter whom I used to think of as a baby should be in love with that
      necktie, those eyes, those chubby cheeks.
    

      Formerly, I either enjoyed my dinner or was indifferent about it. Now it
      does nothing but bore and exasperate me. Since I was made an Excellency
      and Dean of the Faculty, for some reason or other my family found it
      necessary to make a thorough change in our menu and the dinner
      arrangements. Instead of the simple food I was used to as a student and a
      doctor, I am now fed on potage-puree, with some sossoulki swimming
      about in it, and kidneys in Madeira. The title of General and my renown
      have robbed me for ever of schi and savoury pies, and roast goose
      with apple sauce, and bream with kasha. They robbed me as well of
      my maid servant Agasha, a funny, talkative old woman, instead of whom I am
      now waited on by Yegor, a stupid, conceited fellow who always has a white
      glove in his right hand. The intervals between the courses are short, but
      they seem terribly long. There is nothing to fill them. We don't have any
      more of the old good-humour, the familiar conversations, the jokes and the
      laughter; no more mutual endearments, or the gaiety that used to animate
      my children, my wife, and myself when we met at the dinner table. For a
      busy man like me dinner was a time to rest and meet my friends, and a
      feast for my wife and children, not a very long feast, to be sure, but a
      gay and happy one, for they knew that for half an hour I did not belong to
      science and my students, but solely to them and to no one else. No more
      chance of getting tipsy on a single glass of wine, no more Agasha, no more
      bream with kasha, no more the old uproar to welcome our little contretemps
      at dinner, when the cat fought the dog under the table, or Katy's
      head-band fell down her cheek into her soup.
    

      Our dinner nowadays is as nasty to describe as to eat. On my wife's face
      there is pompousness, an assumed gravity, and the usual anxiety. She eyes
      our plates nervously: "I see you don't like the meat?... Honestly, don't
      you like it?" And I must answer, "Don't worry, my dear. The meat is very
      good." She: "You're always taking my part, Nicolai Stiepanich. You never
      tell the truth. Why has Alexander Adolphovich eaten so little?" and the
      same sort of conversation for the whole of dinner. Liza laughs staccato
      and screws up her eyes. I look at both of them, and at this moment at
      dinner here I can see quite clearly that their inner lives have slipped
      out of my observation long ago. I feel as though once upon a time I lived
      at home with a real family, but now I am dining as a guest with an unreal
      wife and looking at an unreal Liza. There has been an utter change in both
      of them, while I have lost sight of the long process that led up to the
      change. No wonder I don't understand anything. What was the reason of the
      change? I don't know. Perhaps the only trouble is that God did not give my
      wife and daughter the strength He gave me. From my childhood I have been
      accustomed to resist outside influences and have been hardened enough.
      Such earthly catastrophes as fame, being made General, the change from
      comfort to living above my means, acquaintance with high society, have
      scarcely touched me. I have survived safe and sound. But it all fell down
      like an avalanche on my weak, unhardened wife and Liza, and crushed them.
    

      Gnekker and the girls talk of fugues and counter-fugues; singers and
      pianists, Bach and Brahms, and my wife, frightened of being suspected of
      musical ignorance, smiles sympathetically and murmurs: "Wonderful.... Is
      it possible?... Why?..." Gnekker eats steadily, jokes gravely, and listens
      condescendingly to the ladies' remarks. Now and then he has the desire to
      talk bad French, and then he finds it necessary for some unknown reason to
      address me magnificently, "Votre Excellence."
    

      And I am morose. Apparently I embarrass them all and they embarrass me. I
      never had any intimate acquaintance with class antagonism before, but now
      something of the kind torments me indeed. I try to find only bad traits in
      Gnekker. It does not take long and then I am tormented because one of my
      friends has not taken his place as bridegroom. In another way too his
      presence has a bad effect upon me. Usually, when I am left alone with
      myself or when I am in the company of people I love, I never think of my
      merits; and if I begin to think about them they seem as trivial as though
      I had become a scholar only yesterday. But in the presence of a man like
      Gnekker my merits appear to me like an extremely high mountain, whose
      summit is lost in the clouds, while Gnekkers move about the foot, so small
      as hardly to be seen.
    

      After dinner I go up to my study and light my little pipe, the only one
      during the whole day, the sole survivor of my old habit of smoking from
      morning to night. My wife comes into me while I am smoking and sits down
      to speak to me. Just as in the morning, I know beforehand what the
      conversation will be.
    

      "We ought to talk seriously, Nicolai Stiepanovich," she begins. "I mean
      about Liza. Why won't you attend?"
    

      "Attend to what?"
    

      "You pretend you don't notice anything. It's not right: It's not right to
      be unconcerned. Gnekker has intentions about Liza. What do you say to
      that?"
    

      "I can't say he's a bad man, because I don't know him; but I've told you a
      thousand times already that I don't like him."
    

      "But that's impossible ... impossible...." She rises and walks about in
      agitation.
    

      "It's impossible to have such an attitude to a serious matter," she says.
      "When our daughter's happiness is concerned, we must put everything
      personal aside. I know you don't like him.... Very well.... But if we
      refuse him now and upset everything, how can you guarantee that Liza won't
      have a grievance against us for the rest of her life? Heaven knows there
      aren't many young men nowadays. It's quite likely there won't be another
      chance. He loves Liza very much and she likes him, evidently. Of course he
      hasn't a settled position. But what is there to do? Please God, he'll get
      a position in time. He comes of a good family, and he's rich."
    

      "How did you find that out?"
    

      "He said so himself. His father has a big house in Kharkov and an estate
      outside. You must certainly go to Kharkov."
    

      "Why?"
    

      "You'll find out there. You have acquaintances among the professors there.
      I'd go myself. But I'm a woman. I can't."
    

      "I will not go to Kharkov," I say morosely.
    

      My wife gets frightened; a tormented expression comes over her face.
    

      "For God's sake, Nicolai Stiepanich," she implores, sobbing, "For God's
      sake help me with this burden! It hurts me."
    

      It is painful to look at her.
    

      "Very well, Varya," I say kindly, "If you like—very well I'll go to
      Kharkov, and do everything you want."
    

      She puts her handkerchief to her eyes and goes to cry in her room. I am
      left alone.
    

      A little later they bring in the lamp. The familiar shadows that have
      wearied me for years fall from the chairs and the lamp-shade on to the
      walls and the floor. When I look at them it seems that it's night already,
      and the cursed insomnia has begun. I lie down on the bed; then I get up
      and walk about the room then lie down again. My nervous excitement
      generally reaches its highest after dinner, before the evening. For no
      reason I begin to cry and hide my head in the pillow. All the while I am
      afraid somebody may come in; I am afraid I shall die suddenly; I am
      ashamed of my tears; altogether, something intolerable is happening in my
      soul. I feel I cannot look at the lamp or the books or the shadows on the
      floor, or listen to the voices in the drawing-room any more. Some
      invisible, mysterious force pushes me rudely out of my house. I jump up,
      dress hurriedly, and go cautiously out into the street so that the
      household shall not notice me. Where shall I go?
    

      The answer to this question has long been there in my brain: "To Katy."
    


      III
    

      As usual she is lying on the Turkish divan or the couch and reading
      something. Seeing me she lifts her head languidly, sits down, and gives me
      her hand.
    

      "You are always lying down like that," I say after a reposeful silence.
      "It's unhealthy. You'd far better be doing something."
    

      "Ah?"
    

      "You'd far better be doing something, I say."
    

      "What?... A woman can be either a simple worker or an actress."
    

      "Well, then—if you can't become a worker, be an actress."
    

      She is silent.
    

      "You had better marry," I say, half-joking.
    

      "There's no one to marry: and no use if I did."
    

      "You can't go on living like this."
    

      "Without a husband? As if that mattered. There are as many men as you
      like, if you only had the will."
    

      "This isn't right, Katy."
    

      "What isn't right?"
    

      "What you said just now."
    

      Katy sees that I am chagrined, and desires to soften the bad impression.
    

      "Come. Let's come here. Here."
    

      She leads me into a small room, very cosy, and points to the writing
      table.
    

      "There. I made it for you. You'll work here. Come every day and bring your
      work with you. They only disturb you there at home.... Will you work here?
      Would you like to?"
    

      In order not to hurt her by refusing, I answer that I shall work with her
      and that I like the room immensely. Then we both sit down in the cosy room
      and begin to talk.
    

      The warmth, the cosy surroundings, the presence of a sympathetic being,
      rouses in me now not a feeling of pleasure as it used but a strong desire
      to complain and grumble. Anyhow it seems to me that if I moan and complain
      I shall feel better.
    

      "It's a bad business, my dear," I begin with a sigh. "Very bad."
    

      "What is the matter?"
    

      "I'll tell you what is the matter. The best and most sacred right of kings
      is the right to pardon. And I have always felt myself a king so long as I
      used this right prodigally. I never judged, I was compassionate, I
      pardoned everyone right and left. Where others protested and revolted I
      only advised and persuaded. All my life I've tried to make my society
      tolerable to the family of students, friends and servants. And this
      attitude of mine towards people, I know, educated every one who came into
      contact with me. But now I am king no more. There's something going on in
      me which belongs only to slaves. Day and night evil thoughts roam about in
      my head, and feelings which I never knew before have made their home in my
      soul. I hate and despise; I'm exasperated, disturbed, and afraid. I've
      become strict beyond measure, exacting, unkind, and suspicious. Even the
      things which in the past gave me the chance of making an extra pun, now
      bring me a feeling of oppression. My logic has changed too. I used to
      despise money alone; now I cherish evil feelings, not to money, but to the
      rich, as if they were guilty. I used to hate violence and arbitrariness;
      now I hate the people who employ violence, as if they alone are to blame
      and not all of us, who cannot educate one another. What does it all mean?
      If my new thoughts and feelings come from a change of my convictions,
      where could the change have come from? Has the world grown worse and I
      better, or was I blind and indifferent before? But if the change is due to
      the general decline of my physical and mental powers—I am sick and
      losing weight every day—then I'm in a pitiable position. It means
      that my new thoughts are abnormal and unhealthy, that I must be ashamed of
      them and consider them valueless...."
    

      "Sickness hasn't anything to do with it," Katy interrupts. "Your eyes are
      opened—that's all. You've begun to notice things you didn't want to
      notice before for some reason. My opinion is that you must break with your
      family finally first of all and then go away."
    

      "You're talking nonsense."
    

      "You don't love them any more. Then, why do you behave unfairly? And is it
      a family! Mere nobodies. If they died to-day, no one would notice their
      absence to-morrow."
    

      Katy despises my wife and daughter as much as they hate her. It's scarcely
      possible nowadays to speak of the right of people to despise one another.
      But if you accept Katy's point of view and own that such a right exists,
      you will notice that she has the same right to despise my wife and Liza as
      they have to hate her.
    

      "Mere nobodies!" she repeats. "Did you have any dinner to-day? It's a
      wonder they didn't forget to tell you dinner was ready. I don't know how
      they still remember that you exist."
    

      "Katy!" I say sternly. "Please be quiet."
    

      "You don't think it's fun for me to talk about them, do you? I wish I
      didn't know them at all. You listen to me, dear. Leave everything and go
      away: go abroad—the quicker, the better."
    

      "What nonsense! What about the University?"
    

      "And the University, too. What is it to you? There's no sense in it all.
      You've been lecturing for thirty years, and where are your pupils? Have
      you many famous scholars? Count them up. But to increase the number of
      doctors who exploit the general ignorance and make hundreds of thousands,—there's
      no need to be a good and gifted man. You aren't wanted."
    

      "My God, how bitter you are!" I get terrified. "How bitter you are. Be
      quiet, or I'll go away. I can't reply to the bitter things you say."
    

      The maid enters and calls us to tea. Thank God, our conversation changes
      round the samovar. I have made my moan, and now I want to indulge another
      senile weakness—reminiscences. I tell Katy about my past, to my
      great surprise with details that I never suspected I had kept safe in my
      memory. And she listens to me with emotion, with pride, holding her
      breath. I like particularly to tell how I once was a student at a seminary
      and how I dreamed of entering the University.
    

      "I used to walk in the seminary garden," I tell her, "and the wind would
      bring the sound of a song and the thrumming of an accordion from a distant
      tavern, or a troika with bells would pass quickly by the seminary
      fence. That would be quite enough to fill not only my breast with a sense
      of happiness, but my stomach, legs, and hands. As I heard the sound of the
      accordion or the bells fading away, I would see myself a doctor and paint
      pictures, one more glorious than another. And, you see, my dreams came
      true. There were more things I dared to dream of. I have been a favourite
      professor thirty years, I have had excellent friends and an honourable
      reputation. I loved and married when I was passionately in love. I had
      children. Altogether, when I look back the whole of my life seems like a
      nice, clever composition. The only thing I have to do now is not to spoil
      the finale. For this, I must die like a man. If death is really a
      danger then I must meet it as becomes a teacher, a scholar, and a citizen
      of a Christian State. But I am spoiling the finale. I am drowning,
      and I run to you and beg for help, and you say: 'Drown. It's your duty.'"
    

      At this point a ring at the bell sounds in the hall. Katy and I both
      recognise it and say:
    

      "That must be Mikhail Fiodorovich."
    

      And indeed in a minute Mikhail Fiodorovich, my colleague, the philologist,
      enters. He is a tall, well-built man about fifty years old, clean shaven,
      with thick grey hair and black eyebrows. He is a good man and an admirable
      friend. He belongs to an old aristocratic family, a prosperous and gifted
      house which has played a notable rÃ´le in the history of our
      literature and education. He himself is clever, gifted, and highly
      educated, but not without his eccentricities. To a certain extent we are
      all eccentric, queer fellows, but his eccentricities have an element of
      the exceptional, not quite safe for his friends. Among the latter I know
      not a few who cannot see his many merits clearly because of his
      eccentricities.
    

      As he walks in he slowly removes his gloves and says in his velvety bass:
    

      "How do you do? Drinking tea. Just in time. It's hellishly cold."
    

      Then he sits down at the table, takes a glass of tea and immediately
      begins to talk. What chiefly marks his way of talking is his invariably
      ironical tone, a mixture of philosophy and jest, like Shakespeare's
      grave-diggers. He always talks of serious matters; but never seriously.
      His opinions are always acid and provocative, but thanks to his tender,
      easy, jesting tone, it somehow happens that his acidity and
      provocativeness don't tire one's ears, and one very soon gets used to it.
      Every evening he brings along some half-dozen stories of the university
      life and generally begins with them when he sits down at the table.
    

      "O Lord," he sighs with an amusing movement of his black eyebrows, "there
      are some funny people in the world."
    

      "Who?" asks Katy.
    

      "I was coming down after my lecture to-day and I met that old idiot N——
      on the stairs. He walks along, as usual pushing out that horse jowl of
      his, looking for some one to bewail his headaches, his wife, and his
      students, who won't come to his lectures. 'Well,' I think to myself, 'he's
      seen me. It's all up—no hope for And so on in the same strain. Or he
      begins like this,
    

      "Yesterday I was at Z's public lecture. Tell it not in Gath, but I do
      wonder how our alma mater dares to show the public such an ass,
      such a double-dyed blockhead as Z. Why he's a European fool. Good Lord,
      you won't find one like him in all Europe—not even if you looked in
      daytime, and with a lantern. Imagine it: he lectures as though he were
      sucking a stick of barley-sugar—su—su—su. He gets a
      fright because he can't make out his manuscript. His little thoughts will
      only just keep moving, hardly moving, like a bishop riding a bicycle.
      Above all you can't make out a word he says. The flies die of boredom,
      it's so terrific. It can only be compared with the boredom in the great
      Hall at the Commemoration, when the traditional speech is made. To hell
      with it!"
    

      Immediately an abrupt change of subject.
    

      "I had to make the speech; three years ago. Nicolai Stiepanovich will
      remember. It was hot, close. My full uniform was tight under my arms,
      tight as death. I read for half an hour, an hour, an hour and a half, two
      hours. 'Well,' I thought, 'thank God I've only ten pages left.' And I had
      four pages of peroration that I needn't read at all. 'Only six pages
      then,' I thought. Imagine it. I just gave a glance in front of me and saw
      sitting next to each other in the front row a general with a broad ribbon
      and a bishop. The poor devils were bored stiff. They were staring about
      madly to stop themselves from going to sleep. For all that they are still
      trying to look attentive, to make some appearance of understanding what
      I'm reading, and look as though they like it. 'Well,' I thought, 'if you
      like it, then you shall have it. I'll spite you.' So I set to and read the
      four pages, every word."
    

      When he speaks only his eyes and eyebrows smile as it is generally with
      the ironical. At such moments there is no hatred or malice in his eyes but
      a great deal of acuteness and that peculiar fox-cunning which you can
      catch only in very observant people. Further, about his eyes I have
      noticed one more peculiarity. When he takes his glass from Katy, or
      listens to her remarks, or follows her with a glance as she goes out of
      the room for a little while, then I catch in his look something humble,
      prayerful, pure....
    

      The maid takes the samovar away and puts on the table a big piece of
      cheese, some fruit, and a bottle of Crimean champagne, a thoroughly bad
      wine which Katy got to like when she lived in the Crimea. Mikhail
      Fiodorovich takes two packs of cards from the shelves and sets them out
      for patience. If one may believe his assurances, some games of patience
      demand a great power of combination and concentration. Nevertheless while
      he sets out the cards he amuses himself by talking continually. Katy
      follows his cards carefully, helping him more by mimicry than words. In
      the whole evening she drinks no more than two small glasses of wine, I
      drink only a quarter of a glass, the remainder of the bottle falls to
      Mikhail Fiodorovich, who can drink any amount without ever getting drunk.
    

      During patience we solve all kinds of questions, mostly of the lofty
      order, and our dearest love, science, comes off second best.
    

      "Science, thank God, has had her day," says Mikhail Fiodorovich very
      slowly. "She has had her swan-song. Ye-es. Mankind has begun to feel the
      desire to replace her by something else. She was grown from the soil of
      prejudice, fed by prejudices, and is now the same quintessence of
      prejudices as were her bygone grandmothers: alchemy, metaphysics and
      philosophy. As between European scholars and the Chinese who have no
      sciences at all the difference is merely trifling, a matter only of
      externals. The Chinese had no scientific knowledge, but what have they
      lost by that?"
    

      "Flies haven't any scientific knowledge either," I say; "but what does
      that prove?"
    

      "It's no use getting angry, Nicolai Stiepanich. I say this only between
      ourselves. I'm more cautious than you think. I shan't proclaim it from the
      housetops, God forbid! The masses still keep alive a prejudice that
      science and art are superior to agriculture and commerce, superior to
      crafts. Our persuasion makes a living from this prejudice. It's not for
      you and me to destroy it. God forbid!"
    

      During patience the younger generation also comes in for it.
    

      "Our public is degenerate nowadays," Mikhail Fiodorovich sighs. "I don't
      speak of ideals and such things, I only ask that they should be able to
      work and think decently. 'Sadly I look at the men of our time'—it's
      quite true in this connection."
    

      "Yes, they're frightfully degenerate," Katy agrees. "Tell me, had you one
      single eminent person under you during the last five or ten years?"
    

      "I don't know how it is with the other professors,—but somehow I
      don't recollect that it ever happened to me."
    

      "In my lifetime I've seen a great many of your students and young
      scholars, a great many actors.... What happened? I never once had the luck
      to meet, not a hero or a man of talent, but an ordinarily interesting
      person. Everything's dull and incapable, swollen and pretentious...."
    

      All these conversations about degeneracy give me always the impression
      that I have unwittingly overheard an unpleasant conversation about my
      daughter. I feel offended because the indictments are made wholesale and
      are based upon such ancient hackneyed commonplaces and such penny-dreadful
      notions as degeneracy, lack of ideals, or comparisons with the glorious
      past. Any indictment, even if it's made in a company of ladies, should be
      formulated with all possible precision; otherwise it isn't an indictment,
      but an empty calumny, unworthy of decent people.
    

      I am an old man, and have served for the last thirty years; but I don't
      see any sign either of degeneracy or the lack of ideals. I don't find it
      any worse now than before. My porter, Nicolas, whose experience in this
      case has its value, says that students nowadays are neither better nor
      worse than their predecessors.
    

      If I were asked what was the thing I did not like about my present pupils,
      I wouldn't say offhand or answer at length, but with a certain precision.
      I know their defects and there's no need for me to take refuge in a mist
      of commonplaces. I don't like the way they smoke, and drink spirits, and
      marry late; or the way they are careless and indifferent to the point of
      allowing students to go hungry in their midst, and not paying their debts
      into "The Students' Aid Society." They are ignorant of modern languages
      and express themselves incorrectly in Russian. Only yesterday my
      colleague, the hygienist, complained to me that he had to lecture twice as
      often because of their incompetent knowledge of physics and their complete
      ignorance of meteorology. They are readily influenced by the most modern
      writers, and some of those not the best, but they are absolutely
      indifferent to classics like Shakespeare, Marcus Aurelius, Epictetus and
      Pascal; and their worldly unpracticality shows itself mostly in their
      inability to distinguish between great and small. They solve all difficult
      questions which have a more or less social character (emigration, for
      instance) by getting up subscriptions, but not by the method of scientific
      investigation and experiment, though this is at their full disposal, and,
      above all, corresponds to their vocation. They readily become
      house-doctors, assistant house-doctors, clinical assistants, or consulting
      doctors, and they are prepared to keep these positions until they are
      forty, though independence, a sense of freedom, and personal initiative
      are quite as necessary in science, as, for instance, in art or commerce. I
      have pupils and listeners, but I have no helpers or successors. Therefore
      I love them and am concerned for them, but I'm not proud of them ... and
      so on.
    

      However great the number of such defects may be, it's only in a cowardly
      and timid person that they give rise to pessimism and distraction. All of
      them are by nature accidental and transitory, and are completely dependent
      on the conditions of life. Ten years will be enough for them to disappear
      or give place to new and different defects, which are quite indispensable,
      but will in their turn give the timid a fright. Students' shortcomings
      often annoy me, but the annoyance is nothing in comparison with the joy I
      have had these thirty years in speaking with my pupils, lecturing to them,
      studying their relations and comparing them with people of a different
      class.
    

      Mikhail Fiodorovich is a slanderer. Katy listens and neither of them
      notices how deep is the pit into which they are drawn by such an outwardly
      innocuous recreation as condemning one's neighbours. They don't realise
      how a simple conversation gradually turns into mockery and derision, or
      how they both begin even to employ the manners of calumny.
    

      "There are some queer types to be found," says Mikhail Fiodorovich.
      "Yesterday I went to see our friend Yegor Pietrovich. There I found a
      student, one of your medicos, a third-year man, I think. His face ...
      rather in the style of Dobroliubov—the stamp of profound thought on
      his brow. We began to talk. 'My dear fellow—an extraordinary
      business. I've just read that some German or other—can't remember
      his name—has extracted a new alkaloid from the human brain—idiotine.'
      Do you know he really believed it, and produced an expression of respect
      on his face, as much as to say, 'See, what a power we are.'"
    

      "The other day I went to the theatre. I sat down. Just in front of me in
      the next row two people were sitting: one, 'one of the chosen,' evidently
      a law student, the other a whiskery medico. The medico was as drunk as a
      cobbler. Not an atom of attention to the stage. Dozing and nodding. But
      the moment some actor began to deliver a loud monologue, or just raised
      his voice, my medico thrills, digs his neighbour in the ribs. 'What's he
      say? Something noble?' 'Noble,' answers 'the chosen.'
    

      "'Brrravo!' bawls the medico. 'No—ble. Bravo.' You see the drunken
      blockhead didn't come to the theatre for art, but for something noble. He
      wants nobility."
    

      Katy listens and laughs. Her laugh is rather strange. She breathes out in
      swift, rhythmic, and regular alternation with her inward breathing. It's
      as though she were playing an accordion. Of her face, only her nostrils
      laugh. My heart fails me. I don't know what to say. I lose my temper,
      crimson, jump up from my seat and cry:
    

      "Be quiet, won't you? Why do you sit here like two toads, poisoning the
      air with your breath? I've had enough."
    

      In vain I wait for them to stop their slanders. I prepare to go home. And
      it's time, too. Past ten o'clock.
    

      "I'll sit here a little longer," says Mikhail Fiodorovich, "if you give me
      leave, Ekaterina Vladimirovna?"
    

      "You have my leave," Katy answers.
    

      "Bene. In that case, order another bottle, please."
    

      Together they escort me to the hall with candles in their hands. While I'm
      putting on my overcoat, Mikhail Fiodorovich says:
    

      "You've grown terribly thin and old lately. Nicolai Stiepanovich. What's
      the matter with you? Ill?
    

      "Yes, a little."
    

      "And he will not look after himself," Katy puts in sternly.
    

      "Why don't you look after yourself? How can you go on like this? God helps
      those who help themselves, my dear man. Give my regards to your family and
      make my excuses for not coming. One of these days, before I go abroad,
      I'll come to say good-bye. Without fail. I'm off next week."
    

      I came away from Katy's irritated, frightened by the talk about my illness
      and discontented with myself. "And why," I ask myself, "shouldn't I be
      attended by one of my colleagues?" Instantly I see how my friend, after
      sounding me, will go to the window silently, think a little while, turn
      towards me and say, indifferently, trying to prevent me from reading the
      truth in his face: "At the moment I don't see anything particular; but
      still, cher confrÃ¨re, I would advise you to break off your work...." And
      that will take my last hope away.
    

      Who doesn't have hopes? Nowadays, when I diagnose and treat myself, I
      sometimes hope that my ignorance deceives me, that I am mistaken about the
      albumen and sugar which I find, as well as about my heart, and also about
      the anasarca which I have noticed twice in the morning. While I read over
      the therapeutic text-books again with the eagerness of a hypochondriac,
      and change the prescriptions every day, I still believe that I will come
      across something hopeful. How trivial it all is!
    

      Whether the sky is cloudy all over or the moon and stars are shining in
      it, every time I come back home I look at it and think that death will
      take me soon. Surely at that moment my thoughts should be as deep as the
      sky, as bright, as striking ... but no! I think of myself, of my wife,
      Liza, Gnekker, the students, people in general. My thoughts are not good,
      they are mean; I juggle with myself, and at this moment my attitude
      towards life can be expressed in the words the famous Arakheev wrote in
      one of his intimate letters: "All good in the world is inseparably linked
      to bad, and there is always more bad than good." Which means that
      everything is ugly, there's nothing to live for, and the sixty-two years I
      have lived out must be counted as lost. I surprise myself in these
      thoughts and try to convince myself they are accidental and temporary and
      not deeply rooted in me, but I think immediately:
    

      "If that's true, why am I drawn every evening to those two toads." And I
      swear to myself never to go to Katy any more, though I know I will go to
      her again to-morrow.
    

      As I pull my door bell and go upstairs, I feel already that I have no
      family and no desire to return to it. It is plain my new, Arakheev
      thoughts are not accidental or temporary in me, but possess my whole
      being. With a bad conscience, dull, indolent, hardly able to move my
      limbs, as though I had a ten ton weight upon me, I lie down in my bed and
      soon fall asleep.
    

      And then—insomnia.
    


      IV
    

      The summer comes and life changes.
    

      One fine morning Liza comes in to me and says in a joking tone:
    

      "Come, Your Excellency. It's all ready."
    

      They lead My Excellency into the street, put me into a cab and drive me
      away. For want of occupation I read the signboards backwards as I go. The
      word "Tavern" becomes "Nrevat." That would do for a baron's name: Baroness
      Nrevat. Beyond, I drive across the field by the cemetery, which produces
      no impression upon me whatever, though I'll soon lie there. After a two
      hours' drive, My Excellency is led into the ground-floor of the bungalow,
      and put into a small, lively room with a light-blue paper.
    

      Insomnia at night as before, but I am no more wakeful in the morning and
      don't listen to my wife, but lie in bed. I don't sleep, but I am in a
      sleepy state, half-forgetfulness, when you know you are not asleep, but
      have dreams. I get up in the afternoon, and sit down at the table by force
      of habit, but now I don't work any more but amuse myself with French
      yellow-backs sent me by Katy. Of course it would be more patriotic to read
      Russian authors, but to tell the truth I'm not particularly disposed to
      them. Leaving out two or three old ones, all the modern literature doesn't
      seem to me to be literature but a unique home industry which exists only
      to be encouraged, but the goods are bought with reluctance. The best of
      these homemade goods can't be called remarkable and it's impossible to
      praise it sincerely without a saving "but"; and the same must be said of
      all the literary novelties I've read during the last ten or fifteen years.
      Not one remarkable, and you can't dispense with "but." They have
      cleverness, nobility, and no talent; talent, nobility and no cleverness;
      or finally, talent, cleverness, but no nobility.
    

      I would not say that French books have talent, cleverness, and nobility.
      Nor do they satisfy me. But they are not so boring as the Russian; and it
      is not rare to find in them the chief constituent of creative genius—the
      sense of personal freedom, which is lacking to Russian authors. I do not
      recall one single new book in which from the very first page the author
      did not try to tie himself up in all manner of conventions and contracts
      with his conscience. One is frightened to speak of the naked body, another
      is bound hand and foot by psychological analysis, a third must have "a
      kindly attitude to his fellow-men," the fourth heaps up whole pages with
      descriptions of nature on purpose to avoid any suspicion of a tendency....
      One desires to be in his books a bourgeois at all costs, another at all
      costs an aristocrat. Deliberation, cautiousness, cunning: but no freedom,
      no courage to write as one likes, and therefore no creative genius.
    

      All this refers to belles-lettres, so-called.
    

      As for serious articles in Russian, on sociology, for instance, or art and
      so forth, I don't read them, simply out of timidity. For some reason in my
      childhood and youth I had a fear of porters and theatre attendants, and
      this fear has remained with me up till now. Even now I am afraid of them.
      It is said that only that which one cannot understand seems terrible. And
      indeed it is very difficult to understand why hall-porters and theatre
      attendants are so pompous and haughty and importantly polite. When I read
      serious articles, I have exactly the same indefinable fear. Their
      portentous gravity, their playfulness, like an archbishop's, their
      over-familiar attitude to foreign authors, their capacity for talking
      dignified nonsense—"filling a vacuum with emptiness"—it is all
      inconceivable to me and terrifying, and quite unlike the modesty and the
      calm and gentlemanly tone to which I am accustomed when reading our
      writers on medicine and the natural sciences. Not only articles; I have
      difficulty also in reading translations even when they are edited by
      serious Russians. The presumptuous benevolence of the prefaces, the
      abundance of notes by the translator (which prevents one from
      concentrating), the parenthetical queries and sics, which are so
      liberally scattered over the book or the article by the translator—seem
      to me an assault on the author's person, as well as on my independence as
      a reader.
    

      Once I was invited as an expert to the High Court. In the interval one of
      my fellow-experts called my attention to the rude behaviour of the public
      prosecutor to the prisoners, among whom were two women intellectuals. I
      don't think I exaggerated at all when I replied to my colleague that he
      was not behaving more rudely than authors of serious articles behave to
      one another. Indeed their behaviour is so rude that one speaks of them
      with bitterness. They behave to each other or to the writers whom they
      criticise either with too much deference, careless of their own dignity,
      or, on the other hand, they treat them much worse than I have treated
      Gnekker, my future son-in-law, in these notes and thoughts of mine.
      Accusations of irresponsibility, of impure intentions, of any kind of
      crime even, are the usual adornment of serious articles. And this, as our
      young medicos love to say in their little articles—quite ultima
      ratio. Such an attitude must necessarily be reflected in the character
      of the young generation of writers, and therefore I'm not at all surprised
      that in the new books which, have been added to our belles lettres
      in the last ten or fifteen years, the heroes drink a great deal of vodka
      and the heroines are not sufficiently chaste.
    

      I read French books and look out of the window, which is open—I see
      the pointed palings of my little garden, two or three skinny trees, and
      there, beyond the garden, the road, fields, then a wide strip of young
      pine-forest. I often delight in watching a little boy and girl, both
      white-haired and ragged, climb on the garden fence and laugh at my
      baldness. In their shining little eyes I read, "Come out, thou bald-head."
      These are almost the only people who don't care a bit about my reputation
      or my title.
    

      I don't have visitors everyday now. I'll mention only the visits of
      Nicolas and Piotr Ignatievich. Nicolas comes to me usually on holidays,
      pretending to come on business, but really to see me. He is very
      hilarious, a thing which never happens to him in the winter.
    

      "Well, what have you got to say?" I ask him, coming out into the passage.
    

      "Your Excellency!" he says, pressing his hand to his heart and looking at
      me with a lover's rapture. "Your Excellency! So help me God! God strike me
      where I stand! Gaudeamus igitur juvenestus."
    

      And he kisses me eagerly on the shoulders, on my sleeves, and buttons.
    

      "Is everything all right over there?" I ask.
    

      "Your Excellency! I swear to God...."
    

      He never stops swearing, quite unnecessarily, and I soon get bored, and
      send him to the kitchen, where they give him dinner. Piotr Ignatievich
      also comes on holidays specially to visit me and communicate his thoughts
      to me. He usually sits by the table in my room, modest, clean, judicious,
      without daring to cross his legs or lean his elbows on the table, all the
      while telling me in a quiet, even voice what he considers very piquant
      items of news gathered from journals and pamphlets.
    

      These items are all alike and can be reduced to the following type: A
      Frenchman made a discovery. Another—a German—exposed him by
      showing that this discovery had been made as long ago as 1870 by some
      American. Then a third—also a German—outwitted them both by
      showing that both of them had been confused, by taking spherules of air
      under a microscope for dark pigment. Even when he wants to make me laugh,
      Piotr Ignatievich tells his story at great length, very much as though he
      were defending a thesis, enumerating his literary sources in detail, with
      every effort to avoid mistakes in the dates, the particular number of the
      journal and the names. Moreover, he does not say Petit simply but
      inevitably, Jean Jacques Petit. If he happens to stay to dinner, he will
      tell the same sort of piquant stories and drive all the company to
      despondency. If Gnekker and Liza begin to speak of fugues and
      counter-fugues in his presence he modestly lowers his eyes, and his face
      falls. He is ashamed that such trivialities should be spoken of in the
      presence of such serious men as him and me.
    

      In my present state of mind five minutes are enough for him to bore me as
      though I had seen and listened to him for a whole eternity. I hate the
      poor man. I wither away beneath his quiet, even voice and his bookish
      language. His stories make me stupid.... He cherishes the kindliest
      feelings towards me and talks to me only to give me pleasure. I reward him
      by staring at his face as if I wanted to hypnotise him, and thinking "Go
      away. Go, go...." But he is proof against my mental suggestion and sits,
      sits, sits....
    

      While he sits with me I cannot rid myself of the idea: "When I die, it's
      quite possible that he will be appointed in my place." Then my poor
      audience appears to me as an oasis where the stream has dried, up, and I
      am unkind to Piotr Ignatievich, and silent and morose as if he were guilty
      of such thoughts and not I myself. When he begins, as usual, to glorify
      the German scholars, I no longer jest good-naturedly, but murmur sternly:
    

      "They're fools, your Germans...."
    

      It's like the late Professor Nikita Krylov when he was bathing with
      Pirogov at Reval. He got angry with the water, which was very cold, and
      swore about "These scoundrelly Germans." I behave badly to Piotr
      Ignatievich; and it's only when he is going away and I see through the
      window his grey hat disappearing behind the garden fence, that I want to
      call him back and say: "Forgive me, my dear fellow."
    

      The dinner goes yet more wearily than in winter. The same Gnekker, whom I
      now hate and despise, dines with me every day. Before, I used to suffer
      his presence in silence, but now I say biting things to him, which make my
      wife and Liza blush. Carried away by an evil feeling, I often say things
      that are merely foolish, end don't know why I say them. Thus it happened
      once that after looking at Gnekker contemptuously for a long while, I
      suddenly fired off, for no reason at all:
    

      "Eagles than barnyard-fowls may lower bend; But fowls shall never to
      the heav'ns ascend."


      More's the pity that the fowl Gnekker shows himself more clever than the
      eagle professor. Knowing my wife and daughter are on his side he maintains
      these tactics. He replies to my shafts with a condescending silence ("The
      old man's off his head.... What's the good of talking to him?"), or makes
      good-humoured fun of me. It is amazing to what depths of pettiness a man
      may descend. During the whole dinner I can dream how Gnekker will be shown
      to be an adventurer, how Liza and my wife will realise their mistake, and
      I will tease them—ridiculous dreams like these at a time when I have
      one foot in the grave.
    

      Now there occur misunderstandings, of a kind which I formerly knew only by
      hearsay. Though it is painful I will describe one which occurred after
      dinner the other day. I sit in my room smoking a little pipe. Enters my
      wife, as usual, sits down and begins to talk. What a good idea it would be
      to go to Kharkov now while the weather is warm and there is the time, and
      inquire what kind of man our Gnekker is.
    

      "Very well. I'll go," I agree.
    

      My wife gets up, pleased with me, and walks to the door; but immediately
      returns:
    

      "By-the bye, I've one more favour to ask. I know you'll be angry; but it's
      my duty to warn you.... Forgive me, Nicolai,—but all our neighbours
      have begun to talk about the way you go to Katy's continually. I don't
      deny that she's clever and educated. It's pleasant to spend the time with
      her. But at your age and in your position it's rather strange to find
      pleasure in her society.... Besides she has a reputation enough to...."
    

      All my blood rushes instantly from my brain. My eyes flash fire. I catch
      hold of my hair, and stamp and cry, in a voice that is not mine:
    

      "Leave me alone, leave me, leave me...."
    

      My face is probably terrible, and my voice strange, for my wife suddenly
      gets pale, and calls aloud, with a despairing voice, also not her own. At
      our cries rush in Liza and Gnekker, then Yegor.
    

      My feet grow numb, as though they did not exist. I feel that I am falling
      into somebody's arms. Then I hear crying for a little while and sink into
      a faint which lasts for two or three hours.
    

      Now for Katy. She comes to see me before evening every day, which of
      course must be noticed by my neighbours and my friends. After a minute she
      takes me with her for a drive. She has her own horse and a new buggy she
      bought this summer. Generally she lives like a princess. She has taken an
      expensive detached bungalow with a big garden, and put into it all her
      town furniture. She has two maids and a coachman. I often ask her:
    

      "Katy, what will you live on when you've spent all your father's money?"
    

      "We'll see, then," she answers.
    

      "But this money deserves to be treated more seriously, my dear. It was
      earned by a good man and honest labour."
    

      "You've told me that before. I know."
    

      First we drive by the field, then by a young pine forest, which you can
      see from my window. Nature seems to me as beautiful as she used, although
      the devil whispers to me that all these pines and firs, the birds and
      white clouds in the sky will not notice my absence in three or four months
      when I am dead. Katy likes to take the reins, and it is good that the
      weather is fine and I am sitting by her side. She is in a happy mood, and
      does not say bitter things.
    

      "You're a very good man, Nicolai," she says. "You are a rare bird. There's
      no actor who could play your part. Mine or Mikhail's, for instance—even
      a bad actor could manage, but yours—there's nobody. I envy you, envy
      you terribly I What am I? What?"
    

      She thinks for a moment, and asks:
    

      "I'm a negative phenomenon, aren't I?"
    

      "Yes," I answer.
    

      "H'm ... what's to be done then?"
    

      What answer can I give? It's easy to say "Work," or "Give your property to
      the poor," or "Know yourself," and because it's so easy to say this I
      don't know what to answer.
    

      My therapeutist colleagues, when teaching methods of cure, advise one "to
      individualise each particular case." This advice must be followed in order
      to convince one's self that the remedies recommended in the text-books as
      the best and most thoroughly suitable as a general rule, are quite
      unsuitable in particular cases. It applies to moral affections as well.
      But I must answer something. So I say:
    

      "You've too much time on your hands, my dear. You must take up
      something.... In fact, why shouldn't you go on the stage again, if you
      have a vocation."
    

      "I can't."
    

      "You have the manner and tone of a victim. I don't like it, my dear. You
      have yourself to blame. Remember, you began by getting angry with people
      and things in general; but you never did anything to improve either of
      them. You didn't put up a struggle against the evil. You got tired. You're
      not a victim of the struggle but of your own weakness. Certainly you were
      young then and inexperienced. But now everything can be different. Come
      on, be an actress. You will work; you will serve in the temple of art."...
    

      "Don't be so clever, Nicolai," she interrupts. "Let's agree once for all:
      let's speak about actors, actresses, writers, but let us leave art out of
      it. You're a rare and excellent man. But you don't understand enough about
      art to consider it truly sacred. You have no flair, no ear for art.
      You've been busy all your life, and you never had time to acquire the flair.
      Really ... I don't love these conversations about art!" she continues
      nervously. "I don't love them. They've vulgarised it enough already, thank
      you."
    

      "Who's vulgarised it?"
    

      "They vulgarised it by their drunkenness, newspapers by their
      over-familiarity, clever people by philosophy."
    

      "What's philosophy got to do with it?"
    

      "A great deal. If a man philosophises, it means he doesn't understand."
    

      So that it should not come to bitter words, I hasten to change the
      subject, and then keep silence for a long while. It's not till we come out
      of the forest and drive towards Katy's bungalow, I return to the subject
      and ask:
    

      "Still, you haven't answered me why you don't want to go on the stage?"
    

      "Really, it's cruel," she cries out, and suddenly blushes all over. "You
      want me to tell you the truth outright. Very well if ... if you will have
      it I I've no talent! No talent and ... much ambition! There you are!"
    

      After this confession, she turns her face away from me, and to hide the
      trembling of her hands, tugs at the reins.
    

      As we approach her bungalow, from a distance we see Mikhail already,
      walking about by the gate, impatiently awaiting us.
    

      "This Fiodorovich again," Katy says with annoyance. "Please take him away
      from me. I'm sick of him. He's flat.... Let him go to the deuce."
    

      Mikhail Fiodorovich ought to have gone abroad long ago, but he has
      postponed his departure every week. There have been some changes in him
      lately. He's suddenly got thin, begun to be affected by drink—a
      thing that never happened to him before, and his black eyebrows have begun
      to get grey. When our buggy stops at the gate he cannot hide his joy and
      impatience. Anxiously he helps Katy and me from the buggy, hastily asks us
      questions, laughs, slowly rubs his hands, and that gentle, prayerful, pure
      something that I used to notice only in his eyes is now poured over all
      his face. He is happy and at the same time ashamed of his happiness,
      ashamed of his habit of coming to Katy's every evening, and he finds it
      necessary to give a reason for his coming, some obvious absurdity, like:
      "I was passing on business, and I thought I'd just drop in for a second."
    

      All three of us go indoors. First we drink tea, then our old friends, the
      two packs of cards, appear on the table, with a big piece of cheese, some
      fruit, and a bottle of Crimean champagne. The subjects of conversation are
      not new, but all exactly the same as they were in the winter. The
      university, the students, literature, the theatre—all of them come
      in for it. The air thickens with slanders, and grows more dose. It is
      poisoned by the breath, not of two toads as in winter, but now by all
      three. Besides the velvety, baritone laughter and the accordion-like
      giggle, the maid who waits upon us hears also the unpleasant jarring laugh
      of a musical comedy general: "He, he, he!"
    


      V
    

      There sometimes come fearful nights with thunder, lightning, rain, and
      wind, which the peasants call "sparrow-nights." There was one such
      sparrow-night in my own personal life....
    

      I wake after midnight and suddenly leap out of bed. Somehow it seems to me
      that I am going to die immediately. I do not know why, for there is no
      single sensation in my body which points to a quick end; but a terror
      presses on my soul as though I had suddenly seen a huge, ill-boding fire
      in the sky.
    

      I light the lamp quickly and drink some water straight out of the
      decanter. Then I hurry to the window. The weather is magnificent. The air
      smells of hay and some delicious thing besides. I see the spikes of my
      garden fence, the sleepy starveling trees by the window, the road, the
      dark strip of forest. There is a calm and brilliant moon in the sky and
      not a single cloud. Serenity. Not a leaf stirs. To me it seems that
      everything is looking at me and listening for me to die.
    

      Dread seizes me. I shut the window and run to the bed, I feel for my
      pulse. I cannot find it in my wrist; I seek it in my temples, my chin, my
      hand again. They are all cold and slippery with sweat. My breathing comes
      quicker and quicker; my body trembles, all my bowels are stirred, and my
      face and forehead feel as though a cobweb had settled on them.
    

      What shall I do? Shall I call my family? No use. I do not know what my
      wife and Liza will do when they come in to me.
    

      I hide my head under the pillow, shut my eyes and wait, wait.... My spine
      is cold. It almost contracts within me. And I feel that death will
      approach me only from behind, very quietly.
    

      "Kivi, kivi." A squeak sounds in the stillness of the night. I do not know
      whether it is in my heart or in the street.
    

      God, how awful! I would drink some more water; but now I dread opening my
      eyes, and fear to raise my head. The terror is unaccountable, animal. I
      cannot understand why I am afraid. Is it because I want to live, or
      because a new and unknown pain awaits me?
    

      Upstairs, above the ceiling, a moan, then a laugh ... I listen. A little
      after steps sound on the staircase. Someone hurries down, then up again.
      In a minute steps sound downstairs again. Someone stops by my door and
      listens.
    

      "Who's there?" I call.
    

      The door opens. I open my eyes boldly and see my wife. Her face is pale
      and her eyes red with weeping.
    

      "You're not asleep, Nicolai Stiepanovich?" she asks.
    

      "What is it?"
    

      "For God's sake go down to Liza. Something is wrong with her."
    

      "Very well ... with pleasure," I murmur, very glad that I am not alone.
      "Very well ... immediately."
    

      As I follow my wife I hear what she tells me, and from agitation
      understand not a word. Bright spots from her candle dance over the steps
      of the stairs; our long shadows tremble; my feet catch in the skirts of my
      dressing-gown. My breath goes, and it seems to me that someone is chasing
      me, trying to seize my back. "I shall die here on the staircase, this
      second," I think, "this second." But we have passed the staircase, the
      dark hall with the Italian window and we go into Liza's room. She sits in
      bed in her chemise; her bare legs hang down and she moans.
    

      "Oh, my God ... oh, my God!" she murmurs, half shutting her eyes from our
      candles. "I can't, I can't."
    

      "Liza, my child," I say, "what's the matter?"
    

      Seeing me, she calls out and falls on my neck.
    

      "Papa darling," she sobs. "Papa dearest ... my sweet. I don't know what it
      is.... It hurts."
    

      She embraces me, kisses me and lisps endearments which I heard her lisp
      when she was still a baby.
    

      "Be calm, my child. God's with you," I say. "You mustn't cry. Something
      hurts me too."
    

      I try to cover her with the bedclothes; my wife gives her to drink; and
      both of us jostle in confusion round the bed. My shoulders push into hers,
      and at that moment I remember how we used to bathe our children.
    

      "But help her, help her!" my wife implores. "Do something!" And what can I
      do? Nothing. There is some weight on the girl's soul; but I understand
      nothing, know nothing and can only murmur:
    

      "It's nothing, nothing.... It will pass.... Sleep, sleep."
    

      As if on purpose a dog suddenly howls in the yard, at first low and
      irresolute, then aloud, in two voices. I never put any value on such signs
      as dogs' whining or screeching owls; but now my heart contracts painfully,
      and I hasten to explain the howling.
    

      "Nonsense," I think. "It's the influence of one organism on another. My
      great nervous strain was transmitted to my wife, to Liza, and to the dog.
      That's all. Such transmissions explain presentiments and previsions."
    

      A little later when I return to my room to write a prescription for Liza I
      no longer think that I shall die soon. My soul simply feels heavy and
      dull, so that I am even sad that I did not die suddenly. For a long while
      I stand motionless in the middle of the room, pondering what I shall
      prescribe for Liza; but the moans above the ceiling are silent and I
      decide not to write a prescription, but stand there still.
    

      There is a dead silence, a silence, as one man wrote, that rings in one's
      ears. The time goes slowly. The bars of moonshine on the windowsill do not
      move from their place, as though congealed.... The dawn is still far away.
    

      But the garden-gate creaks; someone steals in, and strips a twig from the
      starveling trees, and cautiously knocks with it on my window.
    

      "Nicolai Stiepanovich!" I hear a whisper. "Nicolai Stiepanovich!"
    

      I open the window, and I think that I am dreaming. Under the window, close
      against the wall stands a woman in a blade dress. She is brightly lighted
      by the moon and looks at me with wide eyes. Her face is pale, stem and
      fantastic in the moon, like marble. Her chin trembles.
    

      "It is I...." she says, "I ... Katy!"
    

      In the moon all women's eyes are big and black, people are taller and
      paler. Probably that is the reason why I did not recognise her in the
      first moment.
    

      "What's the matter?"
    

      "Forgive me," she says. "I suddenly felt so dreary ... I could not bear
      it. So I came here. There's a light in your window ... and I decided to
      knock.... Forgive me.... Ah, if you knew how dreary I felt! What are you
      doing now?"
    

      "Nothing. Insomnia."
    

      Her eyebrows lift, her eyes shine with tears and all her face is illumined
      as with light, with the familiar, but long unseen, look of confidence.
    

      "Nicolai Stiepanovich!" she says imploringly, stretching out both her
      hands to me. "Dear, I beg you ... I implore.... If you do not despise my
      friendship and my respect for you, then do what I implore you."
    

      "What is it?"
    

      "Take my money."
    

      "What next? What's the good of your money to me?"
    

      "You will go somewhere to be cured. You must cure yourself. You will take
      it? Yes? Dear ... Yes?"
    

      She looks into my face eagerly and repeats:
    

      "Yes? You will take it?"
    

      "No, my dear, I won't take it....", I say. "Thank you."
    

      She turns her back to me and lowers her head. Probably the tone of my
      refusal would not allow any further talk of money.
    

      "Go home to sleep," I say. "I'll see you to-morrow."
    

      "It means, you don't consider me your friend?" she asks sadly.
    

      "I don't say that. But your money is no good to me."
    

      "Forgive me," she says lowering her voice by a full octave. "I understand
      you. To be obliged to a person like me ... a retired actress... But
      good-bye."
    

      And she walks away so quickly that I have no time even to say "Good-bye."
    


      VI
    

      I am in Kharkov.
    

      Since it would be useless to fight against my present mood, and I have no
      power to do it, I made up my mind that the last days of my life shall be
      irreproachable, on the formal side. If I am not right with my family,
      which I certainly admit, I will try at least to do as it wishes. Besides I
      am lately become so indifferent that it's positively all the same, to me
      whether I go to Kharkov, or Paris, or Berditshev.
    

      I arrived here at noon and put up at a hotel not far from the cathedral.
      The train made me giddy, the draughts blew through me, and now I am
      sitting on the bed with my head in my hands waiting for the tic. I ought
      to go to my professor friends to-day, but I have neither the will nor the
      strength.
    

      The old hall-porter comes in to ask whether I have brought my own
      bed-clothes. I keep him about five minutes asking him questions about
      Gnekker, on whose account I came here. The porter happens to be
      Kharkov-born, and knows the town inside out; but he doesn't remember any
      family with the name of Gnekker. I inquire about the estate. The answer is
      the same.
    

      The clock in the passage strikes one,... two,... three.... The last months
      of my life, while I wait for death, seem to me far longer than my whole
      life. Never before could I reconcile myself to the slowness of time as I
      can now. Before, when I had to wait for a train at the station, or to sit
      at an examination, a quarter of an hour would seem an eternity. Now I can
      sit motionless in bed the whole night long, quite calmly thinking that
      there will be the same long, colourless night to-morrow, and the next
      day....
    

      In the passage the clock strikes five, six, seven.... It grows dark. There
      is dull pain in my cheek—the beginning of the tic. To occupy myself
      with thoughts, I return to my old point of view, when I was not
      indifferent, and ask: Why do I, a famous man, a privy councillor, sit in
      this little room, on this bed with a strange grey blanket? Why do I look
      at this cheap tin washstand and listen to the wretched clock jarring in
      the passage? Is all this worthy of my fame and my high position among
      people? And I answer these questions with a smile. My naÃ¯vetÃ© seems funny
      to me—the naÃ¯vetÃ© with which as a young man I exaggerated the
      value of fame and of the exclusive position which famous men enjoy. I am
      famous, my name is spoken with reverence. My portrait has appeared in
      "Niva" and in "The Universal Illustration." I've even read my biography in
      a German paper, but what of that? I sit lonely, by myself, in a strange
      city, on a strange bed, rubbing my aching cheek with my palm....
    

      Family scandals, the hardness of creditors, the rudeness of railway men,
      the discomforts of the passport system, the expensive and unwholesome food
      at the buffets, the general coarseness and roughness of people,—all
      this and a great deal more that would take too long to put down, concerns
      me as much as it concerns any bourgeois who is known only in his own
      little street. Where is the exclusiveness of my position then? We will
      admit that I am infinitely famous, that I am a hero of whom my country is
      proud. All the newspapers give bulletins of my illness, the post is
      already bringing in sympathetic addresses from my friends, my pupils, and
      the public. But all this will not save me from dying in anguish on a
      stranger's bed in utter loneliness. Of course there is no one to blame for
      this. But I must confess I do not like my popularity. I feel that it has
      deceived me.
    

      At about ten I fall asleep, and, in spite of the tic sleep soundly, and
      would sleep for a long while were I not awakened. Just after one there is
      a sudden knock on my door.
    

      "Who's there?"
    

      "A telegram."
    

      "You could have brought it to-morrow," I storm, as I take the telegram
      from the porter. "Now I shan't sleep again."
    

      "I'm sorry. There was a light in your room. I thought you were not
      asleep."
    

      I open the telegram and look first at the signature—my wife's. What
      does she want?
    

      "Gnekker married Liza secretly yesterday. Return."
    

      I read the telegram. For a long while I am not startled. Not Gnekker's or
      Liza's action frightens me, but the indifference with which I receive the
      news of their marriage. Men say that philosophers and true savants
      are indifferent. It is untrue. Indifference is the paralysis of the soul,
      premature death.
    

      I go to bed again and begin to ponder with what thoughts I can occupy
      myself. What on earth shall I think of? I seem to have thought over
      everything, and now there is nothing powerful enough to rouse my thought.
    

      When the day begins to dawn, I sit in bed clasping my knees and, for want
      of occupation I try to know myself. "Know yourself" is good, useful
      advice; but it is a pity that the ancients did not think of showing us the
      way to avail ourselves of it.
    

      Before, when I had the desire to understand somebody else, or myself, I
      used not to take into consideration actions, wherein everything is
      conditional, but desires. Tell me what you want, and I will tell you what
      you are.
    

      And now I examine myself. What do I want?
    

      I want our wives, children, friends, and pupils to love in us, not the
      name or the firm or the label, but the ordinary human beings. What
      besides? I should like to have assistants and successors. What more? I
      should like to wake in a hundred years' time, and take a look, if only
      with one eye, at what has happened to science. I should like to live ten
      years more.... What further?
    

      Nothing further. I think, think a long while and cannot make out anything
      else. However much I were to think, wherever my thoughts should stray, it
      is clear to me that the chief, all-important something is lacking in my
      desires. In my infatuation for science, my desire to live, my sitting here
      on a strange bed, my yearning to know myself, in all the thoughts,
      feelings, and ideas I form about anything, there is wanting the something
      universal which could bind all these together in one whole. Each feeling
      and thought lives detached in me, and in all my opinions about science,
      the theatre, literature, and my pupils, and in all the little pictures
      which my imagination paints, not even the most cunning analyst will
      discover what is called the general idea, or the god of the living man.
    

      And if this is not there, then nothing is there.
    

      In poverty such as this a serious infirmity, fear of death, influence of
      circumstances and people would have been enough to overthrow and shatter
      all that I formerly considered as my conception of the world, and all
      wherein I saw the meaning and joy of my life. Therefore, it is nothing
      strange that I have darkened the last months of my life by thoughts and
      feelings worthy of a slave or a savage, and that I am now indifferent and
      do not notice the dawn. If there is lacking in a man that which is higher
      and stronger than all outside influences, then verily a good cold in the
      head is enough to upset his balance and to make him see each bird an owl
      and hear a dog's whine in every sound; and all his pessimism or his
      optimism with their attendant thoughts, great and small, seem then to be
      merely symptoms and no more.
    

      I am beaten. Then it's no good going on thinking, no good talking. I shall
      sit and wait in silence for what will come.
    

      In the morning the porter brings me tea and the local paper. Mechanically
      I read the advertisements on the first page, the leader, the extracts from
      newspapers and magazines, the local news ... Among other things I find in
      the local news an item like this: "Our famous scholar, emeritus professor
      Nicolai Stiepanovich arrived in Kharkov yesterday by the express, and
      stayed at——hotel."
    

      Evidently big names are created to live detached from those who bear them.
      Now my name walks in Kharkov undisturbed. In some three months it will
      shine as bright as the sun itself, inscribed in letters of gold on my
      tombstone—at a time when I myself will be under the sod....
    

      A faint knock at the door. Somebody wants me.
    

      "Who's there? Come in!"
    

      The door opens. I step back in astonishment, and hasten to pull my
      dressing gown together. Before me stands Katy.
    

      "How do you do?" she says, panting from running up the stairs. "You didn't
      expect me? I ... I've come too."
    

      She sits down and continues, stammering and looking away from me. "Why
      don't you say 'Good morning'? I arrived too ... to-day. I found out you
      were at this hotel, and came to see you."
    

      "I'm delighted to see you," I say shrugging my shoulders. "But I'm
      surprised. You might have dropped straight from heaven. What are you doing
      here?"
    

      "I?... I just came."
    

      Silence. Suddenly she gets up impetuously and comes over to me.
    

      "Nicolai Stiepanich!" she says, growing pale and pressing her hands to her
      breast. "Nicolai Stiepanich! I can't go on like this any longer. I can't.
      For God's sake tell me now, immediately. What shall I do? Tell me, what
      shall I do?"
    

      "What can I say? I am beaten. I can say nothing."
    

      "But tell me, I implore you," she continues, out of breath and trembling
      all over her body. "I swear to you, I can't go on like this any longer. I
      haven't the strength."
    

      She drops into a chair and begins to sob. She throws her head back, wrings
      her hands, stamps with her feet; her hat falls from her head and dangles
      by its string, her hair is loosened.
    

      "Help me, help," she implores. "I can't bear it any more."
    

      She takes a handkerchief out of her little travelling bag and with it
      pulls out some letters which fall from her knees to the floor. I pick them
      up from the floor and recognise on one of them Mikhail Fiodorovich's
      hand-writing, and accidentally read part of a word: "passionat...."
    

      "There's nothing that I can say to you, Katy," I say.
    

      "Help me," she sobs, seizing my hand and kissing it. "You're my father, my
      only friend. You're wise and learned, and you've lived long! You were a
      teacher. Tell me what to do."
    

      I am bewildered and surprised, stirred by her sobbing, and I can hardly
      stand upright.
    

      "Let's have some breakfast, Katy," I say with a constrained smile.
    

      Instantly I add in a sinking voice:
    

      "I shall be dead soon, Katy...."
    

      "Only one word, only one word," she weeps and stretches out her hands to
      me. "What shall I do?"
    

      "You're a queer thing, really....", I murmur. "I can't understand it. Such
      a clever woman and suddenly—weeping...."
    

      Comes silence. Katy arranges her hair, puts on her hat, then crumples her
      letters and stuffs them in her little bag, all in silence and unhurried.
      Her face, her bosom and her gloves are wet with tears, but her expression
      is dry already, stern.... I look at her and am ashamed that I am happier
      than she. It was but a little while before my death, in the ebb of my
      life, that I noticed in myself the absence of what our friends the
      philosophers call the general idea; but this poor thing's soul has never
      known and never will know shelter all her life, all her life.
    

      "Katy, let's have breakfast," I say.
    

      "No, thank you," she answers coldly.
    

      One minute more passes in silence.
    

      "I don't like Kharkov," I say. "It's too grey. A grey city."
    

      "Yes ... ugly.... I'm not here for long.... On my way. I leave to-day."
    

      "For where?"
    

      "For the Crimea ... I mean, the Caucasus."
    

      "So. For long?"
    

      "I don't know."
    

      Katy gets up and gives me her hand with a cold smile, looking away from
      me.
    

      I would like to ask her: "That means you won't be at my funeral?" But she
      does not look at me; her hand is cold and like a stranger's. I escort her
      to the door in silenqe.... She goes out of my room and walks down the long
      passage, without looking back. She knows that my eyes are following her,
      and probably on the landing she will look back.
    

      No, she did not look back. The black dress showed for the last time, her
      steps were stilled.... Goodbye, my treasure!
    





      I
    

      The medical student Mayer, and Ribnikov, a student at the Moscow school of
      painting, sculpture, and architecture, came one evening to their friend
      Vassiliev, law student, and proposed that he should go with them to S——v
      Street. For a long while Vassiliev did not agree, but eventually dressed
      himself and went with them.
    

      Unfortunate women he knew only by hearsay and from books, and never once
      in his life had he been in the houses where they live. He knew there were
      immoral women who were forced by the pressure of disastrous circumstances—environment,
      bad up-bringing, poverty, and the like—to sell their honour for
      money. They do not know pure love, have no children and no legal rights;
      mothers and sisters mourn them for dead, science treats them as an evil,
      men are familiar with them. But notwithstanding all this they do not lose
      the image and likeness of God. They all acknowledge their sin and hope for
      salvation. They are free to avail themselves of every means of salvation.
      True, Society does not forgive people their past, but with God Mary of
      Egypt is not lower than the other saints. Whenever Vassiliev recognised an
      unfortunate woman in the street by her costume or her manner, or saw a
      picture of one in a comic paper, there came into his mind every time a
      story he once read somewhere: a pure and heroic young man falls in love
      with an unfortunate woman and asks her to be his wife, but she,
      considering herself unworthy of such happiness, poisons herself.
    

      Vassiliev lived in one of the streets off the Tverskoi boulevard. When he
      and his friends came out of the house it was about eleven o'clock—the
      first snow had just fallen and all nature was under the spell of this new
      snow; The air smelt of snow, the snow cracked softly under foot, the
      earth, the roofs, the trees, the benches on the boulevards—all were
      soft, white, and young. Owing to this the houses had a different look from
      yesterday, the lamps burned brighter, the air was more transparent, the
      clatter of the cabs was dulled and there entered into the soul with the
      fresh, easy, frosty air a feeling like the white, young, feathery snow.
      "To these sad shores unknowing" the medico began to sing in a pleasant
      tenor, "An unknown power entices...."
    

      "Behold the mill" ... the painter's voice took him up, "it is now fall'n
      to ruin."
    

      "Behold the mill, it is now fall'n to ruin," the medico repeated, raising
      his eyebrows and sadly shaking his head.
    

      He was silent for a while, passed his hand over his forehead trying to
      recall the words, and began to sing in a loud voice and so well that the
      passers-by looked back.
    

      "Here, long ago, came free, free love to me"...
    

      All three went into a restaurant and without taking off their coats they
      each had two thimblefuls of vodka at the bar. Before drinking the second,
      Vassiliev noticed a piece of cork in his Vodka, lifted the glass to his
      eye, looked at it for a long while with a short-sighted frown. The medico
      misunderstood his expression and said—
    

      "Well, what are you staring at? No philosophy, please. Vodka's made to be
      drunk, caviare to be eaten, women to sleep with, snow to walk on. Live
      like a man for one evening."
    

      "Well, I've nothing to say," said Vassiliev laughingly, "I'm not
      refusing?"
    

      The vodka warmed his breast. He looked at his friends, admired and envied
      them. How balanced everything is in these healthy, strong, cheerful
      people. Everything in their minds and souls is smooth and rounded off.
      They sing, have a passion for the theatre, paint, talk continually, and
      drink, and they never have a headache the next day. They are romantic and
      dissolute, sentimental and insolent; they can work and go on the loose and
      laugh at nothing and talk rubbish; they are hot-headed, honest, heroic and
      as human beings not a bit worse than Vassiliev, who watches his every step
      and word, who is careful, cautious, and able to give the smallest trifle
      the dignity of a problem. And he made tip his mind if only for one evening
      to live like his friends, to let himself go, and be free from his own
      control. Must he drink vodka? He'll drink, even if his head falls to
      pieces to-morrow. Must he be taken to women? He'll go. He'll laugh, play
      the fool, and give a joking answer to disapproving passers-by.
    

      He came out of the restaurant laughing. He liked his friends—one in
      a battered hat with a wide brim who aped aesthetic disorder; the other in
      a sealskin cap, not very poor, with a pretence of learned Bohemia. He
      liked the snow, the paleness, the lamp-lights, the dear black prints which
      the passers' feet left on the snow. He liked the air, and above all the
      transparent, tender, naive, virgin tone which can be seen in nature only
      twice in the year: when everything is covered in snow, on the bright days
      in spring, and on moonlight nights when the ice breaks on the river.
    

      "To these sad shores unknowing," he began to sing sotto-voce, "An
      unknown power entices."
    

      And all the way for some reason or other he and his friends had this
      melody on their lips. All three hummed it mechanically out of time with
      each other.
    

      Vassiliev Imagined how in about ten minutes he and his friends would knock
      at a door, how they would stealthily walk through-the narrow little
      passages and dark rooms to the women, how he would take advantage of the
      dark, suddenly strike a match, and see lit up a suffering face and a
      guilty smile. There he will surely find a fair or a dark woman in a white
      nightgown with her hair loose. She will be frightened of the light,
      dreadfully confused and say: "Good God! What are you doing? Blow it out!"
      All this was frightening, but curious and novel.
    


      II
    

      The friends turned out of Trubnoi Square into the Grachovka and soon
      arrived at the street which Vassiliev knew only from hearsay. Seeing two
      rows of houses with brightly lighted windows and wide open doors, and
      hearing the gay sound of pianos and fiddles—sounds which flew out of
      all the doors and mingled in a strange confusion, as if somewhere in the
      darkness over the roof-tops an unseen orchestra were tuning, Vassiliev was
      bewildered and said:
    

      "What a lot of houses!"
    

      "What's that?" said the medico. "There are ten times as many in London.
      There are a hundred thousand of these women there."
    

      The cabmen sat on their boxes quiet and indifferent as in other streets;
      on the pavement walked the same passers-by. No one was in a hurry; no one
      hid his face in his collar; no one shook his head reproachfully. And in
      this indifference, in the confused sound of the pianos and fiddles, in the
      bright windows and wide-open doors, something very free, impudent, bold
      and daring could be felt. It must have been the same as this in the old
      times on the slave-markets, as gay and as noisy; people looked and walked
      with the same indifference.
    

      "Let's begin right at the beginning," said the painter.
    

      The friends walked into a narrow little passage lighted by a single lamp
      with a reflector. When they opened the door a man in a black jacket rose
      lazily from the yellow sofa in the hall. He had an unshaven lackey's face
      and sleepy eyes. The place smelt like a laundry, and of vinegar. From the
      hall a door led into a brightly lighted room. The medico and the painter
      stopped in the doorway, stretched out their necks and peeped into the room
      together:
    

      "Buona sera, signore, Rigoletto—huguenote—traviata!—"
      the painter began, making a theatrical bow.
    

      "Havanna—blackbeetlano—pistoletto!" said the medico, pressing
      his hat to his heart and bowing low.
    

      Vassiliev kept behind them. He wanted to bow theatrically too and say
      something silly. But he only smiled, felt awkward and ashamed, and awaited
      impatiently what was to follow. In the door appeared a little fair girl of
      seventeen or eighteen, with short hair, wearing a short blue dress with a
      white bow on her breast.
    

      "What are you standing in the door for?" she said. "Take off your
      overcoats and come into the salon."
    

      The medico and the painter went into the salon, still speaking Italian.
      Vassiliev followed them irresolutely.
    

      "Gentlemen, take off your overcoats," said the lackey stiffly. "You're not
      allowed in as you are."
    

      Besides the fair girl there was another woman in the salon, very stout and
      tall, with a foreign face and bare arms. She sat by the piano, with a game
      of patience spread on her knees. She took no notice of the guests.
    

      "Where are the other girls?" asked the medico.
    

      "They're drinking tea," said the fair one. "Stiepan," she called out. "Go
      and tell the girls some students have come!"
    

      A little later a third girl entered, in a bright red dress with blue
      stripes. Her face was thickly and unskilfully painted. Her forehead was
      hidden under her hair. She stared with dull, frightened eyes. As she came
      she immediately began to sing in a strong hoarse contralto. After her a
      fourth girl. After her a fifth.
    

      In all this Vassiliev saw nothing new or curious. It seemed to him that he
      had seen before, and more than once, this salon, piano, cheap gilt mirror,
      the white bow, the dress with blue stripes and the stupid, indifferent
      faces. But of darkness, quiet, mystery, and guilty smile—of all he
      had expected to meet here and which frightened him—he did not see
      even a shadow.
    

      Everything was commonplace, prosaic, and dull. Only one thing provoked his
      curiosity a little, that was the terrible, as it were intentional lack of
      taste, which was seen in the overmantels, the absurd pictures, the dresses
      and the White bow. In this lack of taste there was something
      characteristic and singular.
    

      "How poor and foolish it all is!" thought Vassiliev. "What is there in all
      this rubbish to tempt a normal man, to provoke him into committing a
      frightful sin, to buy a living soul for a rouble? I can understand anyone
      sinning for the sake of splendour, beauty, grace, passion; but what is
      there here? What tempts people here? But ... it's no good thinking!"
    

      "Whiskers, stand me champagne." The fair one turned to him.
    

      Vassiliev suddenly blushed.
    

      "With pleasure," he said, bowing politely. "But excuse me if I ... I don't
      drink with you, I don't drink."
    

      Five minutes after the friends were off to another house.
    

      "Why did you order drinks?" stormed the medico. "What a millionaire,
      flinging six roubles into the gutter like that for nothing at all."
    

      "Why shouldn't I give her pleasure if she wants it?" said Vassiliev,
      justifying himself.
    

      "You didn't give her any pleasure. Madame got that. It's Madame who tells
      them to ask the guests for drinks. She makes by it."
    

      "Behold the mill," the painter began to sing, "Now fall'n to ruin...."
    

      When they came to another house the friends stood outside in the
      vestibule, but did not enter the salon. As in the first house, a figure
      rose up from the sofa in the hall, in a black jacket, with a sleepy
      lackey's face. As he looked at this lackey, at his face and shabby jacket,
      Vassiliev thought: "What must an ordinary simple Russian go through before
      Fate casts him up here? Where was he before, and what was he doing? What
      awaits him? Is he married, where's his mother, and does she know he's a
      lackey here?" Thenceforward in every house Vassiliev involuntarily turned
      his attention to the lackey first of all.
    

      In one of the houses, it seemed to be the fourth, the lackey was a dry
      little, puny fellow, with a chain across his waistcoat. He was reading a
      newspaper and took no notice of the guests at all. Glancing at his face,
      Vassiliev had the idea that a fellow with a face like that could steal and
      murder and perjure. And indeed the face was interesting: a big forehead,
      grey eyes, a flat little nose, small close-set teeth, and the expression
      on his face dull and impudent at once, like a puppy hard on a hare.
      Vassiliev had the thought that he would like to touch this lackey's hair:
      is it rough or soft f It must be rough like a dog's.
    


      III
    

      Because he had had two glasses the painter suddenly got rather drunk, and
      unnaturally lively.
    

      "Let's go to another place," he added, waving his hands. "I'll introduce
      you to the best!"
    

      When he had taken his friends into the house which was according to him
      the best, he proclaimed a persistent desire to dance a quadrille. The
      medico began to grumble that they would have to pay the musicians a rouble
      but agreed to be his vis-Ã -vis. The dance began.
    

      It was just as bad in the best house as in the worst. Just the same
      mirrors and pictures were here, the same coiffures and dresses. Looking
      round at the furniture and the costumes Vassiliev now understood that it
      was not lack of taste, but something that might be called the particular
      taste and style of S——v Street, quite impossible to find
      anywhere else, something complete, not accidental, evolved in time. After
      he had been to eight houses he no longer wondered at the colour of the
      dresses or the long trains, or at the bright bows, or the sailor dresses,
      or the thick violent painting of the cheeks; he understood that all this
      was in harmony, that if only one woman dressed herself humanly, or one
      decent print hung on the wall, then the general tone of the whole street
      would suffer.
    

      How badly they manage the business? Can't they really understand that vice
      is only fascinating when it is beautiful and secret, hidden under the
      cloak of virtue? Modest black dresses, pale faces, sad smiles, and
      darkness act more strongly than this clumsy tinsel. Idiots! If they don't
      understand it themselves, their guests ought to teach them....
    

      A girl in a Polish costume trimmed with white fur came up close to him and
      sat down by his side.
    

      "Why don't you dance, my brown-haired darling?" she asked. "What do you
      fed so bored about?"
    

      "Because it is boring."
    

      "Stand me a ChÃ¢teau Lafitte, then you won't be bored."
    

      Vassiliev made no answer. For a little while he was silent, then he asked:
    

      "What time do you go to bed as a rule?"
    

      "Six."
    

      "When do you get up?"
    

      "Sometimes two, sometimes three."
    

      "And after you get up what do you do?"
    

      "We drink coffee. We have dinner at seven."
    

      "And what do you have for dinner?"
    

      "Soup or schi as a rule, beef-steak, dessert. Our madame keeps the
      girls well. But what are you asking all this for?"
    

      "Just to have a talk...."
    

      Vassiliev wanted to ask about all sorts of things. He had a strong desire
      to find out where she came from, were her parents alive, and did they know
      she was here; how she got into the house; was she happy and contented, or
      gloomy and depressed with dark thoughts. Does she ever hope to escape....
      But he could not possibly think how to begin, or how to put his questions
      without seeming indiscreet. He thought for a long while and asked:
    

      "How old are you?"
    

      "Eighty," joked the girl, looking and laughing at the tricks the painter
      was doing with his hands and feet.
    

      She suddenly giggled and uttered a long filthy expression aloud so that
      every one could hear.
    

      Vassiliev, terrified, not knowing how to look, began to laugh uneasily. He
      alone smiled: all the others, his friends, the musicians and the women—paid
      no attention to his neighbour. They might never have heard.
    

      "Stand me a Lafitte," said the girl again.
    

      Vassiliev was suddenly repelled by her white trimming and her voice and
      left her. It seemed to him close and hot. His heart began to beat slowly
      and violently, like a hammer, one, two, three.
    

      "Let's get out of here," he said, pulling the painter's sleeve.
    

      "Wait. Let's finish it."
    

      While the medico and the painter were finishing their quadrille,
      Vassiliev, in order to avoid the women, eyed the musicians. The pianist
      was a nice old man with spectacles, with a face like Marshal Basin; the
      fiddler a young man with a short, fair beard dressed in the latest
      fashion. The young man was not stupid or starved, on the contrary he
      looked clever, young and fresh. He was dressed with a touch of
      originality, and played with emotion. Problem: how did he and the decent
      old man get here? Why aren't they ashamed to sit here? What do they think
      about when they look at the women?
    

      If the piano and the fiddle were played by ragged, hungry, gloomy, drunken
      creatures, with thin stupid faces, then their presence would perhaps be
      intelligible. As it was, Vassiliev could understand. nothing. Into his
      memory came the story that he had read about the unfortunate woman, and
      now he found that the human figure with the guilty smile had nothing to do
      with this. It seemed to him that they were not unfortunate women that he
      saw, but they belonged to another, utterly different world, foreign and
      inconceivable to him; if he had seen this world on the stage or read about
      it in a book he would never have believed it.... The girl with the white
      trimming giggled again and said something disgusting aloud. He felt sick,
      blushed, and went out:
    

      "Wait. We're coming too," cried the painter.
    


      IV
    

      "I had a talk with my mam'selle while we were dancing," said the
      medico when all three came into the street. "The subject was her first
      love. He was a bookkeeper in Smolensk with a wife and five
      children. She was seventeen and lived with her pa and ma who kept a soap
      and candle shop."
    

      "How did he conquer her heart?" asked Vassiliev.
    

      "He bought her fifty roubles'-worth of underclothes—Lord knows
      what!"
    

      "However could he get her love-story out of his girl?" thought Vassiliev.
      "I can't. My dear chaps, I'm off home," he said.
    

      "Why?"
    

      "Because I don't know how to get on here. I'm bored and disgusted. What is
      there amusing about it? If they were only human beings; but they're
      savages and beasts. I'm going, please."
    

      "Grisha darling, please," the painter said with a sob in his voice,
      pressing close to Vassiliev, "let's go to one more—then to Hell with
      them. Do come, Grigor."
    

      They prevailed on Vassiliev and led him up a staircase. The carpet and the
      gilded balustrade, the porter who opened the door, the panels which
      decorated the hall, were still in the same S——v Street style,
      but here it was perfected and imposing.
    

      "Really I'm going home," said Vassiliev, taking off his overcoat.
    

      "Darling, please, please," said the painter and kissed him on the neck.
      "Don't be so faddy, Grigri—be a pal. Together we came, together we
      go. What a beast you are though!"
    

      "I can wait for you in the street. My God, it's disgusting here."
    

      "Please, please.... You just look on, see, just look on."
    

      "One should look at things objectively," said the medico seriously.
    

      Vassiliev entered the salon and sat down. There were many more guests
      besides him and his friends: two infantry officers, a grey, bald-headed
      gentleman with gold spectacles, two young clean-shaven men from the
      Surveyors' Institute, and a very drunk man with an actor's face. All the
      girls were looking after these guests and took no notice of Vassiliev.
      Only one of them dressed like AÃ¯da glanced at him sideways, smiled at
      something and said with a yawn:
    

      "So the dark one's come."
    

      Vassiliev's heart was beating and his face was burning. He felt ashamed
      for being there, disgusted and tormented. He was tortured by the thought
      that he, a decent and affectionate man (so he considered himself up till
      now), despised these women and felt nothing towards them but repulsion. He
      could not feel pity for them or for the musicians or the lackeys.
    

      "It's because I don't try to understand them," he thought. "They're all
      more like beasts than human beings; but all the same they are human
      beings. They've got souls. One should understand them first, then judge
      them."
    

      "Grisha, don't go away. Wait for us," called the painter; and he
      disappeared somewhere.
    

      Soon the medico disappeared also.
    

      "Yes, one should try to understand. It's no good, otherwise," thought
      Vassiliev, and he began to examine intently the face of each girl, looking
      for the guilty smile. But whether he could not read faces or because none
      of these women felt guilty he saw in each face only a dull look of common,
      vulgar boredom and satiety. Stupid eyes, stupid smiles, harsh, stupid
      voices, impudent gestures—and nothing else. Evidently every woman
      had in her past a love romance with a bookkeeper and fifty roubles'-worth
      of underclothes. And in the present the only good things in life were
      coffee, a three-course dinner, wine, quadrilles, and sleeping till two in
      the afternoon....
    

      Finding not one guilty smile, Vassiliev began to examine them to see if
      even one looked clever and his attention was arrested by one pale, rather
      tired face. It was that of a dark woman no longer young, wearing a dress
      scattered with spangles. She sat in a chair staring at the floor and
      thinking of something. Vassiliev paced up and down and then sat down
      beside her as if by accident.
    

      "One must begin with something trivial," he thought, "and gradually pass
      on to serious conversation...."
    

      "What a beautiful little dress you have on," he said, and touched the gold
      fringe of her scarf with his finger.
    

      "It's all right," said the dark woman.
    

      "Where do you come from?"
    

      "I? A long way. From Tchernigov."
    

      "It's a nice part."
    

      "It always is, where you don't happen to be."
    

      "What a pity I can't describe nature," thought Vassiliev. "I'd move her by
      descriptions of Tchernigov. She must love it if she was born there."
    

      "Do you feel lonely here?" he asked.
    

      "Of course I'm lonely."
    

      "Why don't you go away from here, if you're lonely?"
    

      "Where shall I go to? Start begging, eh?"
    

      "It's easier to beg than to live here."
    

      "Where did you get that idea? Have you been a beggar?"
    

      "I begged, when I hadn't enough to pay my university fees; and even if I
      hadn't begged it's easy enough to understand. A beggar is a free man, at
      any rate, and you're a slave."
    

      The dark woman stretched herself, and followed with sleepy eyes the lackey
      who carried a tray of glasses and soda-water.
    

      "Stand us a champagne," she said, and yawned again.
    

      "Champagne," said Vassiliev. "What would happen if your mother or your
      brother suddenly came in? What would you say? And what would they say? You
      would say 'champagne' then."
    

      Suddenly the noise of crying was heard. From the next room where the
      lackey had carried the soda-water, a fair man rushed out with a red face
      and angry eyes. He was followed by the tall, stout madame, who screamed in
      a squeaky voice:
    

      "No one gave you permission to slap the girls in the face. Better class
      than you come here, and never slap a girl. You bounder!"
    

      Followed an uproar. Vassiliev was scared and went white. In the next room
      some one wept, sobbing, sincerely, as only the insulted weep. And he
      understood that indeed human beings lived here, actually human beings, who
      get offended, suffer, weep, and ask for help. The smouldering hatred, the
      feeling of repulsion, gave way to an acute sense of pity and anger against
      the wrong-doer. He rushed into the room from which the weeping came.
      Through the rows of bottles which stood on the marble table-top he saw a
      suffering tear-stained face, stretched out his hands towards this face,
      stepped to the table and instantly gave a leap back in terror. The sobbing
      woman was dead-drunk.
    

      As he made his way through the noisy crowd, gathered round the fair man,
      his heart failed him, he lost his courage like a boy, and it seemed to him
      that in this foreign, inconceivable world, they wanted to run after him,
      to beat him, to abuse him with foul words. He tore down his coat from the
      peg and rushed headlong down the stairs.
    


      V
    

      Pressing dose to the fence, he stood near to the house and waited for his
      friends to come out. The sounds of the pianos and fiddles, gay, bold,
      impudent and sad, mingled into chaos in the air, and this confusion was,
      as before, as if an unseen orchestra were tuning in the dark over the
      roof-tops. If he looked up towards the darkness, then all the background
      was scattered with white, moving points: it was snowing. The flakes,
      coming into the light, spun lazily in the air like feathers, and still
      more lazily fell. Flakes of snow crowded whirling about Vassiliev, and
      hung on his beard, his eyelashes, his eyebrows. The cabmen, the horses,
      and the passers-by, all were white.
    

      "How dare the snow fall in this street?" thought Vassiliev. "A curse on
      these houses."
    

      Because of his headlong rush down the staircase his feet failed him from
      weariness; he was out of breath as if he had climbed a mountain. His heart
      beat so loud that he could hear it. A longing came over him to get out of
      this street as soon as possible and go home; but still stronger was his
      desire to wait for his friends and to vent upon them his feeling of
      heaviness.
    

      He had not understood many things in the houses. The souls of the
      perishing women were to him a mystery as before; but it was dear to him
      that the business was much worse than one would have thought. If the
      guilty woman who poisoned herself was called a prostitute, then it was
      hard to find a suitable name for all these creatures, who danced to the
      muddling music and said long, disgusting phrases. They were not perishing;
      they were already done for.
    

      "Vice is here," he thought; "but there is neither confession of sin nor
      hope of salvation. They are bought and sold, drowned in wine and torpor,
      and they are dull and indifferent as sheep and do not understand. My God,
      my God!"
    

      It was so dear to him that all that which is called human dignity,
      individuality, the image and likeness of God, was here dragged down to the
      gutter, as they say of drunkards, and that not only the street and the
      stupid women were to blame for it.
    

      A crowd of students white with snow, talking and laughing gaily, passed
      by. One of them, a tall, thin man, peered into Vassiliev's face and said
      drunkenly, "He's one of ours. Logged, old man? Aha! my lad. Never mind.
      Walk up, never say die, uncle."
    

      He took Vassiliev by the shoulders and pressed his cold wet moustaches to
      his cheek, then slipped, staggered, brandished his arms, and cried out:
    

      "Steady there—don't fall."
    

      Laughing, he ran to join his comrades.
    

      Through the noise the painter's voice became audible.
    

      "You dare beat women! I won't have it. Go to Hell. You're regular swine."
    

      The medico appeared at the door of the house. He glanced round and on
      seeing Vassiliev, said in alarm:
    

      "Is that you? My God, it's simply impossible to go anywhere with Yegor. I
      can't understand a chap like that. He kicked up a row—can't you
      hear? Yegor," he called from the door. "Yegor!"
    

      "I won't have you hitting women." The painter's shrill voice was audible
      again from upstairs.
    

      Something heavy and bulky tumbled down the staircase. It was the painter
      coming head over heels. He had evidently been thrown out.
    

      He lifted himself up from the ground, dusted his hat, and with an angry
      indignant face, shook his fist at the upstairs.
    

      "Scoundrels! Butchers! Bloodsuckers! I won't have you hitting a weak,
      drunken woman. Ah, you...."
    

      "Yegor ... Yegor!" the medico began to implore, "I give my word I'll never
      go out with you again. Upon my honour, I won't."
    

      The painter gradually calmed, and the friends went home.
    

      "To these sad shores unknowing"—the medico began—"An unknown
      power entices...."
    

      "Behold the mill," the painter sang with him after a pause, "Now fallen
      into ruin." How the snow is falling, most Holy Mother. Why did you go
      away, Grisha? You're a coward; you're only an old woman."
    

      Vassiliev was walking behind his friends. He stared at their backs and
      thought: "One of two things: either prostitution only seems to us an evil
      and we exaggerate it, or if prostitution is really such an evil as is
      commonly thought, these charming friends of mine are just as much slavers,
      violators, and murderers as the inhabitants of Syria and Cairo whose
      photographs appear in 'The Field.' They're singing, laughing, arguing
      soundly now, but haven't they just been exploiting starvation, ignorance,
      and stupidity? They have, I saw them at it. Where does their humanity,
      their science, and their painting come in, then? The science, art, and
      lofty sentiments of these murderers remind me of the lump of fat in the
      story. Two robbers killed a beggar in a forest; they began to divide his
      clothes between themselves and found in his bag a lump of pork fat. 'In
      the nick of time,' said one of them. 'Let's have a bite!' 'How can you?'
      the other cried in terror. 'Have you forgotten to-day's Friday?' So they
      refrained from eating. After having cut the man's throat they walked out
      of the forest confident that they were pious fellows. These two are just
      the same. When they've paid for women they go and imagine they're painters
      and scholars....
    

      "Listen, you two," he said angrily and sharply. "Why do you go to those
      places? Can't you understand how horrible they are? Your medicine tells
      you every one of these women dies prematurely from consumption or
      something else; your arts tell you that she died morally still earlier.
      Each of them dies because during her lifetime she accepts on an average,
      let us say, five hundred men. Each of them is killed by five hundred men,
      and you're amongst the five hundred. Now if each of you comes here and to
      places like this two hundred and fifty times in his lifetime, then it
      means that between you you have killed one woman. Can't you understand
      that? Isn't it horrible?"
    

      "Ah, isn't this awful, my God?"
    

      "There, I knew it would end like this," said the painter frowning. "We
      oughtn't to have had anything to do with this fool of a blockhead. I
      suppose you think your head's full of great thoughts and great ideas now.
      Devil knows what they are, but they're not ideas. You're staring at me now
      with hatred and disgust; but if you want my opinion you'd better build
      twenty more of the houses than look like that. There's more vice in your
      look than in the whole street. Let's dear out, Volodya, damn him! He's a
      fool. He's a blockhead, and that's all he is."
    

      "Human beings are always killing each other," said the medico. "That is
      immoral, of course. But philosophy won't help you. Good-bye!"
    

      The friends parted at Trubnoi Square and went their way. Left alone,
      Vassiliev began to stride along the boulevard. He was frightened of the
      dark, frightened of the snow, which fell to the earth in little flakes,
      but seemed to long to cover the whole world; he was frightened of the
      street-lamps, which glimmered faintly through the clouds of snow. An
      inexplicable faint-hearted fear possessed his soul. Now and then people
      passed him; but he gave a start and stepped aside. It seemed to him that
      from everywhere there came and stared at him women, only women....
    

      "It's coming on," he thought, "I'm going to have a fit."
    


      VI
    

      At home he lay on his bed and began to talk, shivering all over his body.
    

      "Live women, live.... My God, they're alive."
    

      He sharpened the edge of his imagination in every possible way. Now he was
      the brother of an unfortunate, now her father. Now he was himself a fallen
      woman, with painted cheeks; and all this terrified him.
    

      It seemed to him somehow that he must solve this question immediately, at
      all costs, and that the problem was not strange to him, but was his own.
      He made a great effort, conquered his despair, and, sitting on the side of
      the bed, his head clutched in his hands, he began to think:
    

      How could all the women he had seen that night be saved? The process of
      solving a problem was familiar to him as to a learned person; and
      notwithstanding all his excitement he kept strictly to this process. He
      recalled to mind the history of the question, its literature, and just
      after three o'clock he was pacing up and down, trying to remember all the
      experiments which are practised nowadays for the salvation of women. He
      had a great many good friends who lived in furnished rooms, Falzfein,
      Galyashkin, Nechaiev, Yechkin ... not a few among them were honest and
      self-sacrificing, and some of them had attempted to save these women....
    

      All these few attempts, thought Vassiliev, rare attempts, may be divided
      into three groups. Some having rescued a woman from a brothel hired a room
      for her, bought her a sewing-machine and she became a dressmaker, and the
      man who saved her kept her for his mistress, openly or otherwise, but
      later when he had finished his studies and was going away, he would hand
      her over to another decent fellow. So the fallen woman remained fallen.
      Others after having bought her out also hired a room for her, bought the
      inevitable sewing-machine and started her off reading and writing and
      preached at her. The woman sits and sews as long as it is novel and
      amusing, but later, when she is bored, she begins to receive men secretly,
      or runs back to where she can sleep till three in the afternoon, drink
      coffee, and eat till she is full. Finally, the most ardent and
      self-sacrificing take a bold, determined step. They marry, and when the
      impudent, self-indulgent, stupefied creature becomes a wife, a lady of the
      house, and then a mother, her life and outlook are utterly changed, and in
      the wife and mother it is hard to recognise the unfortunate woman. Yes,
      marriage is the best, it may be the only, resource.
    

      "But it's impossible," Vassiliev said aloud and threw himself down on his
      bed. "First of all, I could not marry one. One would have to be a saint to
      be able to do it, unable to hate, not knowing disgust. But let us suppose
      that the painter, the medico, and I got the better of our feelings and
      married, that all these women got married, what is the result? What kind
      of effect follows? The result is that while the women get married here in
      Moscow, the Smolensk bookkeeper seduces a fresh lot, and these will pour
      into the empty places, together with women from Saratov, Nijni-Novgorod,
      Warsaw.... And what happens to the hundred thousand in London? What can be
      done with those in Hamburg?
    

      The oil in the lamp was used up and the lamp began to smell. Vassiliev did
      not notice it. Again he began to pace up and down, thinking. Now he put
      the question differently. What can be done to remove the demand for fallen
      women? For this it is necessary that the men who buy and kill them should
      at once begin to feel all the immorality of their rÃ´le of
      slave-owners, and this should terrify them. It is necessary to save the
      men.
    

      Science and art apparently won't do, thought Vassiliev. There is only one
      way out—to be an apostle.
    

      And he began to dream how he would stand to-morrow evening at the corner
      of the street and say to each passer-by: "Where are you going and what
      for? Fear God!"
    

      He would turn to the indifferent cabmen and say to them:
    

      "Why are you standing here? Why don't you revolt? You do believe in God,
      don't you? And you do know that this is a crime, and that people will go
      to Hell for this? Why do you keep quiet, then? True, the women are
      strangers to you, but they have fathers and brothers exactly the same as
      you...."
    

      Some friend of Vassiliev's once said of him that he was a man of talent.
      There is a talent for writing, for the theatre, for painting; but
      Vassiliev's was peculiar, a talent for humanity. He had a fine and noble
      flair for every kind of suffering. As a good actor reflects in
      himself the movement and voice of another, so Vassiliev could reflect in
      himself another's pain. Seeing tears, he wept. With a sick person, he
      himself became sick and moaned. If he saw violence done, it seemed to him
      that he was the victim. He was frightened like a child, and, frightened,
      ran for help. Another's pain roused him, excited him, threw him into a
      state of ecstasy....
    

      Whether the friend was right I do not know, but what happened to Vassiliev
      when it seemed to him that the question was solved was very much like an
      ecstasy. He sobbed, laughed, said aloud the things he would say to-morrow,
      felt a burning love for the men who would listen to him and stand by his
      side at the corner of the street, preaching. He sat down to write to them;
      he made vows.
    

      All this was the more like an ecstasy in that it did not last. Vassiliev
      was soon tired. The London women, the Hamburg women, those from Warsaw,
      crushed him with their mass, as the mountains crush the earth. He quailed
      before this mass; he lost himself; he remembered he had no gift for
      speaking, that he was timid and faint-hearted, that strange people would
      hardly want to listen to and understand him, a law-student in his third
      year, a frightened and insignificant figure. The true apostleship
      consisted, not only in preaching, but also in deeds....
    

      When daylight came and the carts rattled on the streets, Vassiliev lay
      motionless on the sofa, staring at one point. He did not think any more of
      women, or men, or apostles. All his attention was fixed on the pain of his
      soul which tormented him. It was a dull pain, indefinite, vague; it was
      like anguish and the most acute fear and despair. He could say where the
      pain was. It was in his breast, under the heart. It could not be compared
      to anything. Once on a time he used to have violent toothache. Once, he
      had pleurisy and neuralgia. But all these pains were as nothing beside the
      pain of his soul. Beneath this pain life seemed repulsive. The thesis, his
      brilliant work already written, the people he loved, the salvation of
      fallen women, all that which only yesterday he loved or was indifferent
      to, remembered now, irritated him in the same way as the noise of the
      carts, the running about of the porters and the daylight.... If someone
      now were to perform before his eyes a deed of mercy or an act of revolting
      violence, both would produce upon him an equally repulsive impression. Of
      all the thoughts which roved lazily in his head, two only did not irritate
      him: one—at any moment he had the power to kill himself, the other—that
      the pain would not last more than three days. The second he knew from
      experience.
    

      After having lain down for a while he got up and walked wringing his
      hands, not from corner to corner as usually, but in a square along the
      walls. He caught a glimpse of himself in the glass. His face was pale and
      haggard, his temples hollow, his eyes bigger, darker, more immobile, as if
      they were not his own, and they expressed the intolerable suffering of his
      soul.
    

      In the afternoon the painter knocked at the door.
    

      "Gregory, are you at home?" he asked.
    

      Receiving no answer, he stood musing for a while, and said to himself
      good-naturedly:
    

      "Out. He's gone to the University. Damn him."
    

      And went away.
    

      Vassiliev lay down on his bed and burying his head in the pillow he began
      to cry with the pain. But the faster his tears flowed, the more terrible
      was the pain. When it was dark, he got into his mind the idea of the
      horrible night which was awaiting him and awful despair seized him. He
      dressed quickly, ran out of his room, leaving the door wide open, and into
      the street without reason or purpose. Without asking himself where he was
      going, he walked quickly to Sadovaia Street.
    

      Snow was falling as yesterday. It was thawing. Putting his hands into his
      sleeves, shivering, and frightened of the noises and the bells of the
      trams and of passers-by, Vassiliev walked from Sadovaia to Sukhariev Tower
      then to the Red Gates, and from here he turned and went to Basmannaia. He
      went into a public-house and gulped down a big glass of vodka, but felt no
      better. Arriving at Razgoulyai, he turned to the right and began to stride
      down streets that he had never in his life been down before. He came to
      that old bridge under which the river Yaouza roars and from whence long
      rows of lights are seen in the windows of the Red Barracks. In order to
      distract the pain of his soul by a new sensation or another pain, not
      knowing what to do, weeping and trembling, Vassiliev unbuttoned his coat
      and jacket, baring his naked breast to the damp snow and the wind. Neither
      lessened the pain. Then he bent over the rail of the bridge and stared
      down at the black, turbulent Yaouza, and he suddenly wanted to throw
      himself head-first, not from hatred of life, not for the sake of suicide,
      but only to hurt himself and so to kill one pain by another. But the black
      water, the dark, deserted banks covered with snow were frightening. He
      shuddered and went on. He walked as far as the Red Barracks, then back and
      into a wood, from the wood to the bridge again.
    

      "No! Home, home," he thought. "At home I believe it's easier."
    

      And he went back. On returning home he tore off his wet clothes and hat,
      began to pace along the walls, and paced incessantly until the very
      morning.
    


      VII
    

      The next morning when the painter and the medico came to see him, they
      found him in a shirt torn to ribbons, his hands bitten all over, tossing
      about in the room and moaning with pain.
    

      "For God's sake!" he began to sob, seeing his comrades, "Take me anywhere
      you like, do what you like, but save me, for God's sake now, now! I'll
      kill myself."
    

      The painter went pale and was bewildered. The medico, too, nearly began to
      cry; but, believing that medical men must be cool and serious on every
      occasion of life, he said coldly:
    

      "It's a fit you've got. But never mind. Come to the doctor, at once."
    

      "Anywhere you like, but quickly, for God's sake!"
    

      "Don't be agitated. You must struggle with yourself."
    

      The painter and the medico dressed Vassiliev with trembling hands and led
      him into the street.
    

      "Mikhail Sergueyich has been wanting to make your acquaintance for a long
      while," the medico said on the way. "He's a very nice man, and knows his
      job splendidly. He took his degree in '82, and has got a huge practice
      already. He keeps friends with the students."
    

      "Quicker, quicker...." urged Vassiliev. Mikhail Sergueyich, a stout doctor
      with fair hair, received the friends politely, firmly, coldly, and smiled
      with one cheek only.
    

      "The painter and Mayer have told me of your disease already," he said.
      "Very glad to be of service to you. Well? Sit down, please."
    

      He made Vassiliev sit down in a big chair by the table, and put a box of
      cigarettes in front of him.
    

      "Well?" he began, stroking his knees. "Let's make a start. How old are
      you?"
    

      He put questions and the medico answered. He asked whether Vassiliev's
      father suffered from any peculiar diseases, if he had fits of drinking,
      was he distinguished by his severity or any other eccentricities. He asked
      the same questions about his grandfather, mother, sisters, and brothers.
      Having ascertained that his mother had a fine voice and occasionally
      appeared on the stage, he suddenly brightened up and asked:
    

      "Excuse me, but could you recall whether the theatre was not a passion
      with your mother?"
    

      About twenty minutes passed. Vassiliev was bored by the doctor stroking
      his knees and talking of the same thing all the while.
    

      "As far as I can understand your questions, Doctor," he said. "You want to
      know whether my disease is hereditary or not. It is not hereditary."
    

      The doctor went on to ask if Vassiliev had not any secret vices in his
      early youth, any blows on the head, any love passions, eccentricities, or
      exceptional infatuations. To half the questions habitually asked by
      careful doctors you may return no answer without any injury to your
      health; but Mikhail Sergueyich, the medico and the painter looked as
      though, if Vassiliev failed to answer even one single question, everything
      would be ruined. For some reason the doctor wrote down the answers he
      received on a scrap of paper. Discovering that Vassiliev had already
      passed through the faculty of natural science and was now in the Law
      faculty, the doctor began to be pensive....
    

      "He wrote a brilliant thesis last year...." said the medico.
    

      "Excuse me. You mustn't interrupt me; you prevent me from concentrating,"
      the doctor said, smiling with one cheek. "Yes, certainly that is important
      for the anamnesis.... Yes, yes.... And do you drink vodka?" he turned to
      Vassiliev.
    

      "Very rarely."
    

      Another twenty minutes passed. The medico began sotto voce to give
      his opinion of the immediate causes of the fit and told how he, the
      painter and Vassiliev went to S——v Street the day before
      yesterday.
    

      The indifferent, reserved, cold tone in which his friends and the doctor
      were speaking of the women and the miserable street seemed to him in the
      highest degree strange....
    

      "Doctor, tell me this one thing," he said, restraining himself from being
      rude. "Is prostitution an evil or not?"
    

      "My dear fellow, who disputes it?" the doctor said with an expression as
      though he had long ago solved all these questions for himself. "Who
      disputes it?"
    

      "Are you a psychiatrist?"
    

      "Yes-s, a psychiatrist."
    

      "Perhaps all of you are right," said Vassiliev, rising and beginning to
      walk from corner to corner. "It may be. But to me all this seems amazing.
      They see a great achievement in my having passed through two faculties at
      the university; they praise me to the skies because I have written a work
      that will be thrown away and forgotten in three years' time, but became I
      can't speak of prostitutes as indifferently as I can about these chairs,
      they send me to doctors, call me a lunatic, and pity me."
    

      For some reason Vassiliev suddenly began to feel an intolerable pity for
      himself, his friends, and everybody whom he had seen the day before
      yesterday, and for the doctor. He began to sob and fell into the chair.
    

      The friends looked interrogatively at the doctor. He, looking as though he
      magnificently understood the tears and the despair, and knew himself a
      specialist in this line, approached Vassiliev and gave him some drops to
      drink, and then when Vassiliev grew calm undressed him and began to
      examine the sensitiveness of his skin, of the knee reflexes....
    

      And Vassiliev felt better. When he was coming out of the doctor's he was
      already ashamed; the noise of the traffic did not seem irritating, and the
      heaviness beneath his heart became easier and easier as though it were
      thawing. In his hand were two prescriptions. One was for kali-bromatum,
      the other—morphia. He used to take both before.
    

      He stood still in the street for a while, pensive, and then, taking leave
      of his friends, lazily dragged on towards the university.
    





      Sophia Pietrovna, the wife of the solicitor Loubianzev, a handsome young
      woman of about twenty-five, was walking quickly along a forest path with
      her bungalow neighbour, the barrister Ilyin. It was just after four. In
      the distance, above the path, white feathery clouds gathered; from behind
      them some bright blue pieces of cloud showed through. The clouds were
      motionless, as if caught on the tops of the tall, aged fir trees. It was
      calm and warm.
    

      In the distance the path was cut across by a low railway embankment, along
      which at this hour, for some reason or other, a sentry strode. Just behind
      the embankment a big, six-towered church with a rusty roof shone white.
    

      "I did not expect to meet you here," Sophia Pietrovna was saying, looking
      down and touching the last year's leaves with the end of her parasol. "But
      now I am glad to have met you. I want to speak to you seriously and
      finally. Ivan Mikhailovich, if you really love and respect me I implore
      you to stop pursuing me i You follow me like a shadow—there's such a
      wicked look in your eye—you make love to me—write
      extraordinary letters and ... I don't know how all this is going to end—Good
      Heavens! What can all this lead to?"
    

      Ilyin was silent. Sophia Pietrovna took a few steps and continued:
    

      "And this sudden complete change has happened in two or three weeks after
      five years of friendship. I do not know you any more, Ivan Mikhailovich."
    

      Sophia Pietrovna glanced sideways at her companion. He was staring
      intently, screwing up his eyes at the feathery clouds. The expression of
      his face was angry, capricious and distracted, like that of a man who
      suffers and at the same time must listen to nonsense.
    

      "It is annoying that you yourself can't realise it!" Madame Loubianzev
      continued, shrugging her shoulders. "Please understand that you're not
      playing a very nice game. I am married, I love and respect my husband. I
      have a daughter. Don't you really care in the slightest for all this?
      Besides, as an old friend, you know my views on family life ... on the
      sanctity of the home, generally."
    

      Ilyin gave an angry grunt and sighed:
    

      "The sanctity of the home," he murmured, "Good Lord!"
    

      "Yes, yes. I love and respect my husband and at any rate the peace of my
      family life is precious to me. I'd sooner let myself be killed than be the
      cause of Andrey's or his daughter's unhappiness. So, please, Ivan
      Mikhailovich, for goodness' sake, leave me alone. Let us be good and dear
      friends, and give up these sighings and gaspings which don't suit you.
      It's settled and done with! Not another word about it. Let us talk of
      something else!"
    

      Sophia Pietrovna again glanced sideways at Ilyin. He was looking up. He
      was pale, and angrily he bit his trembling lips. Madame Loubianzev could
      not understand why he was disturbed and angry, but his pallor moved her.
    

      "Don't be cross. Let's be friends," she said, sweetly.
    

      "Agreed! Here is my hand."
    

      Ilyin took her tiny plump hand in both his, pressed it and slowly raised
      it to his lips.
    

      "I'm not a schoolboy," he murmured. "I'm not in the least attracted by the
      idea of friendship with the woman I love."
    

      "That's enough. Stop! It is all settled and done with. We have come as far
      as the bench. Let us sit down...."
    

      A sweet sense of repose filled Sophia Pietrovna's soul. The most difficult
      and delicate thing was already said. The tormenting question was settled
      and done with. Now she could breathe easily and look straight at Ilyin.
      She looked at him, and the egotistical sense of superiority that a woman
      feels over her lover caressed her pleasantly. She liked the way this big
      strong man with a virile angry face and a huge black beard sat obediently
      at her side and hung his head. They were silent for a little while.
      "Nothing is yet settled and done with," Ilyin began. "You are reading me a
      sermon. 'I love and respect my husband ... the sanctity of the home....' I
      know all that for myself and I can tell you more. Honestly and sincerely I
      confess that I consider my conduct as criminal and immoral. What else? But
      why say what is known already? Instead of sermonizing you had far better
      tell me what I am to do."
    

      "I have already told you. Go away."
    

      "I have gone. You know quite well. I have started five times and half-way
      there I have come back again. I can show you the through tickets. I have
      kept them all safe. But I haven't the power to run away from you. I
      struggle frightfully, but what in Heaven's name is the use? If I cannot
      harden myself, if I'm weak and faint-hearted. I can't fight nature. Do you
      understand? I cannot! I run away from her and she holds me back by my
      coattails. Vile, vulgar weakness."
    

      Ilyin blushed, got up, and began walking by the bench:
    

      "How I hate and despise myself. Good Lord, I'm like a vicious boy—running
      after another man's wife, writing idiotic letters, degrading myself. Ach!"
      He clutched his head, grunted and sit down.
    

      "And now comes your lack of sincerity into the bargain," he continued with
      bitterness. "If you don't think I am playing a nice game—why are you
      here? What drew you? In my letters I only ask you for a straightforward
      answer: Yes, or No; and instead of giving it me, every day you contrive
      that we shall meet 'by chance' and you treat me to quotations from a moral
      copy-book."
    

      Madame Loubianzev reddened and got frightened. She suddenly felt the kind
      of awkwardness that a modest woman would feel at being suddenly discovered
      naked.
    

      "You seem to suspect some deceit on my side," she murmured. "I have always
      given you a straight answer; and I asked you for one to-day."
    

      "Ah, does one ask such things? If you had said to me at once 'Go away,' I
      would have gone long ago, but you never told me to. Never once have you
      been frank. Strange irresolution. My God, either you're playing with me,
      or...."
    

      Ilyin did not finish, and rested his head in his hands. Sophia Pietrovna
      recalled her behaviour all through. She remembered that she had felt all
      these days not only in deed but even in her most intimate thoughts opposed
      to Ilyin's love. But at the same moment she knew that there was a grain of
      truth in the barrister's words. And not knowing what kind of truth it was
      she could not think, no matter how much she thought about it, what to say
      to him in answer to his complaint. It was awkward being silent, so she
      said shrugging her shoulders:
    

      "So I'm to blame for that too?"
    

      "I don't blame you for your insincerity," sighed Ilyin. "It slipped out
      unconsciously. Your insincerity is natural to you, in the natural order of
      things as well. If all mankind were to agree suddenly to become serious,
      everything would go to the Devil, to ruin."
    

      Sophia Pietrovna was not in the mood for philosophy; but she was glad of
      the opportunity to change the conversation and asked:
    

      "Why indeed?"
    

      "Because only savages and animals are sincere. Since civilisation
      introduced into society the demand, for instance, for such a luxury as
      woman's virtue, sincerity has been out of place."
    

      Angrily Ilyin began to thrust his stick into the sand. Madame Loubianzev
      listened without understanding much of it; she liked the conversation.
      First of all, she was pleased that a gifted man should speak to her, an
      average woman, about intellectual things; also it gave her great pleasure
      to watch how the pale, lively, still angry, young face was working. Much
      she did not understand; but the fine courage of modern man was revealed to
      her, the courage by which he without reflection or surmise solves the
      great questions and constructs his simple conclusions.
    

      Suddenly she discovered that she was admiring him, and it frightened her.
    

      "Pardon, but I don't really understand," she hastened to say. "Why did you
      mention insincerity? I entreat you once more, be a dear, good friend and
      leave me alone. Sincerely, I ask it."
    

      "Good—I'll do my best. But hardly anything will come of it. Either
      I'll put a bullet through my brains or ... I'll start drinking in the
      stupidest possible way. Things will end badly for me. Everything has its
      limit, even a struggle with nature. Tell me now, how can one struggle with
      madness? If you've drunk wine, how can you get over the excitement? What
      can I do if your image has grown into my soul, and stands incessantly
      before my eyes, night and day, as plain as that fir tree there? Tell me
      then what thing I must do to get out of this wretched, unhappy state, when
      all my thoughts, desires, and dreams belong, not to me, but to some devil
      that has got hold of me? I love you, I love you so much that I've turned
      away from my path, given up my career and my closest friends, forgot my
      God. Never in my life have I loved so much."
    

      Sophia Pietrovna, who was not expecting this turn, drew her body away from
      Ilyin, and glanced at him frightened. Tears shone in his eyes. His lips
      trembled, and a hungry, suppliant expression showed over all his face.
    

      "I love you," he murmured, bringing his own eyes near to her big,
      frightened ones. "You are so beautiful. I'm suffering now; but I swear I
      could remain so all my life, suffering and looking into your eyes, but....
      Keep silent, I implore you."
    

      Sophia Pietrovna as if taken unawares began, quickly, quickly, to think
      out words with which to stop him. "I shall go away," she decided, but no
      sooner had she moved to get up, than Ilyin was on his knees at her feet
      already. He embraced her knees, looked into her eyes and spoke
      passionately, ardently, beautifully. She did not hear his words, for her
      fear and agitation. Somehow now at this dangerous moment when her knees
      pleasantly contracted, as in a warm bath, she sought with evil intention
      to read some meaning into her sensation. She was angry because the whole
      of her instead of protesting virtue was filled with weakness, laziness,
      and emptiness, like a drunken man to whom the ocean is but knee-deep; only
      in the depths of her soul, a little remote malignant voice teased: "Why
      don't you go away? Then this is right, is it?"
    

      Seeking in herself an explanation she could not understand why she had not
      withdrawn the hand to which Ilyin's lips clung like a leech, nor why, at
      the same time as Ilyin, she looked hurriedly right and left to see that
      they were not observed.
    

      The fir-trees and the clouds stood motionless, and gazed at them severely
      like broken-down masters who see something going on, but have been bribed
      not to report to the head. The sentry on the embankment stood like a stick
      and seemed to be staring at the bench. "Let him look!" thought Sophia
      Pietrovna.
    

      "But ... But listen," she said at last with despair in her voice. "What
      will this lead to? What will happen afterwards?"
    

      "I don't know. I don't know," he began to whisper, waving these unpleasant
      questions aside.
    

      The hoarse, jarring whistle of a railway engine became audible. This cold,
      prosaic sound of the everyday world made Madame Loubianzev start.
    

      "It's time, I must go," she said, getting up quickly. "The train is
      coming. Audrey is arriving. He will want his dinner."
    

      Sophia Pietrovna turned her blazing cheeks to the embankment. First the
      engine came slowly into sight, after it the carriages. It was not a
      bungalow train, but a goods train. In a long row, one after another like
      the days of man's life, the cars drew past the white background of the
      church, and there seemed to be no end to them.
    

      But at last the train disappeared, and the end car with the guard and the
      lighted lamps disappeared into the green. Sophia Pietrovna turned sharply
      and not looking at Ilyin began to walk quickly back along the path. She
      had herself in control again. Red with shame, offended, not by Ilyin, no I
      but by the cowardice and shamelessness with which she, a good, respectable
      woman allowed a stranger to embrace her knees. She had only one thought
      now, to reach her bungalow and her family as quickly as possible. The
      barrister could hardly keep up with her. Turning from the path on to a
      little track, she glanced at him so quickly that she noticed only the sand
      on his knees, and she motioned with her hand at him to let her be.
    

      Running into the house Sophia Pietrovna stood for about five minutes
      motionless in her room, looking now at the window then at the writing
      table.... "You disgraceful woman," she scolded herself; "disgraceful!" In
      spite of herself she recollected every detail, hiding nothing, how all
      these days she had been against Ilyin's love-making, yet she was somehow
      drawn to meet him and explain; but besides this when he was lying at her
      feet she felt an extraordinary pleasure. She recalled everything, not
      sparing herself, and now, stifled with shame, she could have slapped her
      own face.
    

      "Poor Andrey," she thought, trying, as she remembered her husband, to give
      her face the tenderest possible expression—"Varya, my poor darling
      child, does not know what a mother she has. Forgive me, my dears. I love
      you very much ... very much!..."
    

      And wishing to convince herself that she was still a good wife and mother,
      that corruption had not yet touched those "sanctities" of hers, of which
      she had spoken to Ilyin, Sophia Pietrovna ran into the kitchen and scolded
      the cook for not having laid the table for Andrey Ilyitch. She tried to
      imagine her husband's tired, hungry look, and pitying him aloud, she laid
      the table herself, a thing which she had never done before. Then she found
      her daughter Varya, lifted her up in her hands and kissed her
      passionately; the child seemed to her heavy and cold, but she would not
      own it to herself, and she began to tell her what a good, dear, splendid
      father she had.
    

      But when, soon after, Andrey. Ilyitch arrived, she barely greeted him. The
      flow of imaginary feelings had ebbed away without convincing her of
      anything; she was only exasperated and enraged by the lie. She sat at the
      window, suffered, and raged. Only in distress can people understand how
      difficult it is to master their thoughts and feelings. Sophia Pietrovna
      said afterwards a confusion was going on inside her as hard to define as
      to count a cloud of swiftly flying sparrows. Thus from the fact that she
      was delighted at her husband's arrival and pleased with the way he behaved
      at dinner, she suddenly concluded that she had begun to hate him. Andrey
      Ilyitch, languid with hunger and fatigue, while waiting for the soup, fell
      upon the sausage and ate it greedily, chewing loudly and moving his
      temples.
    

      "My God," thought Sophia Pietrovna. "I do love and respect him, but ...
      why does he chew so disgustingly."
    

      Her thoughts were no less disturbed than her feelings. Madame Loubianzev,
      like all who have no experience of the struggle with unpleasant thought,
      did her best not to think of her unhappiness, and the more zealously she
      tried, the more vivid Ilyin became to her imagination, the sand on his
      knees, the feathery clouds, the train....
    

      "Why did I—idiot—go to-day?" she teased herself. "And am I
      really a person who can't answer for herself?"
    

      Fear has big eyes. When Andrey Ilyitch had finished the last course, she
      had already resolved to tell him everything and so escape from danger.
    

      "Andrey, I want to speak to you seriously," she began after dinner, when
      her husband was taking off his coat and boots in order to have a lie down.
    

      "Well?"
    

      "Let's go away from here!"
    

      "How—where to? It's still too early to go to town."
    

      "No. Travel or something like that."
    

      "Travel," murmured the solicitor, stretching himself. "I dream of it
      myself, but where shall I get the money, and who'll look after my
      business."
    

      After a little reflection he added:
    

      "Yes, really you are bored. Go by yourself if you want to."
    

      Sophia Pietrovna agreed; but at the same time she saw that Ilyin would be
      glad of the opportunity to travel in the same train with her, in the same
      carriage....
    

      She pondered and looked at her husband, who was full fed but still
      languid. For some reason her eyes stopped on his feet, tiny, almost
      womanish, in stupid socks. On the toe of both socks little threads were
      standing out. Under the drawn blind a bumble bee was knocking against the
      window pane and buzzing. Sophia Pietrovna stared at the threads, listened
      to the bumble bee and pictured her journey.... Day and night Ilyin sits
      opposite, without taking his eyes from her, angry with his weakness and
      pale with the pain of his soul. He brands himself as a libertine, accuses
      her, tears his hair; but when the dark comes he seizes the chance when the
      passengers go to sleep or alight at a station and falls on his knees
      before her and clasps her feet, as he did by the bench....
    

      She realised that she was dreaming....
    

      "Listen. I am not going by myself," she said. "You must come, too!"
    

      "Sophochka, that's all imagination!" sighed Loubianzev. "You must be
      serious and only ask for the possible...."
    

      "You'll come when you And out!" thought Sophia Pietrovna.
    

      Having decided to go away at all costs, she began to feel free from
      danger; her thoughts fell gradually into order, she became cheerful and
      even allowed herself to think about everything. Whatever she may think or
      dream about, she is going all the same. While her husband still slept,
      little by little, evening came....
    

      She sat in the drawing-room playing the piano. Outside the window the
      evening animation, the sound of music, but chiefly the thought of her own
      cleverness in mastering her misery gave the final touch to her joy. Other
      women, her easy conscience told her, in a position like her own would
      surely not resist, they would spin round like a whirlwind; but she was
      nearly burnt up with shame, she suffered and now she had escaped from a
      danger which perhaps was nonexistent! Her virtue and resolution moved her
      so much that she even glanced at herself in the glass three times.
    

      When it was dark visitors came. The men sat down to cards in the
      dining-room, the ladies were in the drawing room and on the terrace. Ilyin
      came last, he was stem and gloomy and looked ill. He sat down on a corner
      of the sofa and did not get up for the whole evening. Usually cheerful and
      full of conversation, he was now silent, frowning, and rubbing his eyes.
      When he had to answer a question he smiled with difficulty and only with
      his upper lip, answering abruptly and spitefully. He made about five jokes
      in all, but his jokes seemed crude and insolent. It seemed to Sophia
      Pietrovna that he was on the brink of hysteria. But only now as she sat at
      the piano did she acknowledge that the unhappy man was not in the mood to
      joke, that he was sick in his soul, he could find no place for himself. It
      was for her sake he was ruining the best days of his career and his youth,
      wasting his last farthing on a bungalow, had left his mother and sisters
      uncared for, and, above all, was breaking down under the martyrdom of his
      struggle. From simple, common humanity she ought to take him seriously....
    

      All this was dear to her, even to paining her. If she were to go up to
      Ilyin now and say to him "No," there would be such strength in her voice
      that it would be hard to disobey. But she did not go up to him and she did
      not say it, did not even think it.... The petty selfishness of a young
      nature seemed never to have been revealed in her as strongly as that
      evening. She admitted that Byin was unhappy and that he sat on the sofa as
      if on hot coals. She was sorry for him, but at the same time the presence
      of the man who loved her so desperately filled her with a triumphant sense
      of her own power. She felt her youth, her beauty, her inaccessibility, and—since
      she had decided to go away—she gave herself full rein this evening.
      She coquetted, laughed continually, she sang with singular emotion, and as
      one inspired. Everything made her gay and everything seemed funny. It
      amused her to recall the incident of the bench, the sentry looking on. The
      visitors seemed funny to her, Ilyin's insolent jokes, his tie pin which
      she had never seen before. The pin was a little red snake with tiny
      diamond eyes; the snake seemed so funny that she was ready to kiss and
      kiss it.
    

      Sophia Pietrovna, nervously sang romantic songs, with a kind of
      half-intoxication, and as if jeering at another's sorrow she chose sad,
      melancholy songs that spoke of lost hopes, of the past, of old age....
      "And old age is approaching nearer and nearer," she sang. What had she to
      do with old age?
    

      "There's something wrong going on in me," she thought now and then through
      laughter and singing.
    

      At twelve o'clock the visitors departed. Ilyin was the last to go. She
      still felt warm enough about him to go with him to the lower step of the
      terrace. She had the idea of telling him that she was going away with her
      husband, just to see what effect this news would have upon him.
    

      The moon was hiding behind the clouds, but it was so bright that Sophia
      Pietrovna could see the wind playing with the tails of his overcoat and
      with the creepers on the terrace. It was also plain how pale Ilyin was,
      and how he twisted his upper-lip, trying to smile. "Sonia, Sonichka, my
      dear little woman," he murmured, not letting her speak. "My darling, my
      pretty one."
    

      In a paroxysm of tenderness with tears in his voice, he showered her with
      endearing words each tenderer than the other, and was already speaking to
      her as if she were his wife or his mistress. Suddenly and unexpectedly to
      her, he put one arm round her and with the other hand he seized her elbow.
    

      "My dear one, my beauty," he began to whisper, kissing the nape of her
      neck; "be sincere, come to me now."
    

      She slipped out of his embrace and lifted her head to break out in
      indignation and revolt. But indignation did not come, and of all her
      praiseworthy virtue and purity, there was left only enough for her to say
      that which all average women say in similar circumstances:
    

      "You must be mad."
    

      "But really let us go," continued Ilyin. "Just now and over there by the
      bench I felt convinced that you, Sonia, were as helpless as myself. You
      too will be all the worse for it. You love me, and you are making a
      useless bargain with your conscience."
    

      Seeing that she was leaving him he seized her by her lace sleeve and ended
      quickly:
    

      "If not to-day, then to-morrow; but you will have to give in. What's the
      good of putting if off? My dear, my darling Sonia, the verdict has been
      pronounced. Why postpone the execution? Why deceive yourself?"
    

      Sophia Pietrovna broke away from him and suddenly disappeared inside the
      door. She returned to the drawing-room, shut the piano mechanically,
      stared for a long time at the cover of a music book, and sat down. She
      could neither stand nor think.... From her agitation and passion remained
      only an awful weakness mingled with laziness and tiredness. Her conscience
      whispered to her that she had behaved wickedly and foolishly to-night,
      like a madwoman; that just now she had been kissed on the terrace, and
      even now she had some strange sensation in her waist and in her elbow. Not
      a soul was in the drawing-room. Only a single candle was burning. Madame
      Loubianzev sat on a little round stool before the piano without stirring
      as if waiting for something, and as if taking advantage of her extreme
      exhaustion and the dark a heavy unconquerable desire began to possess her.
      Like a boa-constrictor, it enchained her limbs and soul. It grew every
      second and was no longer threatening, but stood clear before her in all
      its nakedness.
    

      She sat thus for half an hour, not moving, and not stopping herself from
      thinking of Ilyin. Then she got up lazily and went slowly into the
      bed-room. Andrey Ilyitch was in bed already. She sat by the window and
      gave herself to her desire. She felt no more "confusion." All her feelings
      and thoughts pressed lovingly round some clear purpose. She still had a
      mind to struggle, but instantly she waved her hand impotently, realising
      the strength and the determination of the foe. To fight him power and
      strength were necessary, but her birth, up-bringing and life had given her
      nothing on which to lean.
    

      "You're immoral, you're horrible," she tormented herself for her weakness.
      "You're a nice sort, you are!"
    

      So indignant was her insulted modesty at this weakness that she called
      herself all the bad names that she knew and she related to herself many
      insulting, degrading truths. Thus she told herself that she never was
      moral, and she had not fallen before only because there was no pretext,
      that her day-long struggle had been nothing but a game and a comedy....
    

      "Let us admit that I struggled," she thought, "but what kind of a fight
      was it? Even prostitutes struggle before they sell themselves, and still
      they do sell themselves. It's a pretty sort of fight. Like milk, turns in
      a day." She realised that it was not love that drew her from her home nor
      Ilyin's personality, but the sensations which await her.... A little
      week-end type like the rest of them.
    

      "When the young bird's mother was killed," a hoarse tenor finished
      singing.
    

      If I am going, it's time, thought Sophia Pietrovna. Her heart began to
      beat with a frightful force.
    

      "Andrey," she almost cried. "Listen. Shall we go away? Shall we? Yes?"
    

      "Yes.... I've told you already. You go alone."
    

      "But listen," she said, "if you don't come too, you may lose me. I seem to
      be in love already."
    

      "Who with?" Andrey Ilyitch asked.
    

      "It must be all the same for you, who with," Sophia Pietrovna cried out.
    

      Andrey Ilyitch got up, dangled his feet over the side of the bed, with a
      look of surprise at the dark form of his wife.
    

      "Imagination," he yawned.
    

      He could not believe her, but all the same he was frightened. After having
      thought for a while, and asked his wife some unimportant questions, he
      gave his views of the family, of infidelity.... He spoke sleepily for
      about ten minutes and then lay down again. His remarks had no success.
      There are a great many opinions in this world, and more than half of them
      belong to people who have never known misery.
    

      In spite of the late hour, the bungalow people were still moving behind
      their windows. Sophia Pietrovna put on a long coat and stood for a while,
      thinking. She still had force of mind to say to her sleepy husband:
    

      "Are you asleep? I'm going for a little walk. Would you like to come with
      me?"
    

      That was her last hope. Receiving no answer, she walked out. It was breezy
      and cool. She did not feel the breeze or the darkness but walked on and
      on.... An irresistible power drove her, and it seemed to her that if she
      stopped that power would push her in the back. "You're an immoral woman,"
      she murmured mechanically. "You're horrible."
    

      She was choking for breath, burning with shame, did not feel her feet
      under her, for that which drove her along was stronger than her shame, her
      reason, her fear....
    





      Nadya Zelenina had just returned with her mother from the theatre, where
      they had been to see a performance of "Eugene Oniegin." Entering her room,
      she quickly threw off her dress, loosened her hair, and sat down hurriedly
      in her petticoat and a white blouse to write a letter in the style of
      Tatiana.
    

      "I love you,"—she wrote—"but you don't love me; no, you
      don't!"
    

      The moment she had written this, she smiled.
    

      She was only sixteen years old, and so far she had not been in love. She
      knew that Gorny, the officer, and Gronsdiev, the student, loved her; but
      now, after the theatre, she wanted to doubt their love. To be unloved and
      unhappy—how interesting. There is something beautiful, affecting,
      romantic in the fact that one loves deeply while the other is indifferent.
      Oniegin is interesting because he does not love at all, and Tatiana is
      delightful because she is very much in love; but if they loved each other
      equally and were happy, they would seem boring, instead.
    

      "Don't go on protesting that you love me," Nadya wrote on, thinking of
      Gorny, the officer, "I can't believe you. You're very clever, educated,
      serious; you have a great talent, and perhaps, a splendid future waiting,
      but I am an uninteresting poor-spirited girl, and you yourself know quite
      well that I shall only be a drag upon your life. It's true I carried you
      off your feet, and you thought you had met your ideal in me, but that was
      a mistake. Already you are asking yourself in despair, 'Why did I meet
      this girl?' Only your kindness prevents you from confessing it."
    

      Nadya pitied herself. She wept and went on.
    

      "If it were not so difficult for me to leave mother and brother I would
      put on a nun's gown and go where my eyes direct me. You would then be free
      to love another. If I were to die!"
    

      Through her tears she could not make out what she had written. Brief
      rainbows trembled on the table, on the floor and the ceiling, as though
      Nadya were looking through a prism. Impossible to write. She sank back in
      her chair and began to think of Gorny.
    

      Oh, how fascinating, how interesting men are! Nadya remembered the
      beautiful expression of Gorny's face, appealing, guilty, and tender, when
      someone discussed music with him,—the efforts he made to prevent the
      passion from sounding in his voice. Passion must be concealed in a society
      where cold reserve and indifference are the signs of good breeding. And he
      does try to conceal it, but he does not succeed, and everybody knows quite
      well that he has a passion for music. Never-ending discussions about
      music, blundering pronouncements by men who do not understand—keep
      him in incessant tension. He is scared, timid, silent. He plays superbly,
      as an ardent pianist. If he were not an officer, he would be a famous
      musician.
    

      The tears dried in her eyes. Nadya remembered how Gorny told her of his
      love at a symphony concert, and again downstairs by the cloak-room.
    

      "I am so glad you have at last made the acquaintance of the student
      Gronsdiev," she continued to write. "He is a very clever man, and you are
      sure to love him. Yesterday he was sitting with us till two o'clock in the
      morning. We were all so happy. I was sorry that you hadn't come to us. He
      said a lot of remarkable things."
    

      Nadya laid her hands on the table and lowered her head. Her hair covered
      the letter. She remembered that Gronsdiev also loved her, and that he had
      the same right to her letter as Gorny. Perhaps she had better write to
      Gronsdiev? For no cause, a happiness began to quicken in her breast. At
      first it was a little one, rolling about in her breast like a rubber ball.
      Then it grew broader and bigger, and broke forth like a wave. Nadya had
      already forgotten about Gorny and Gronsdiev. Her thoughts became confused.
      The happiness grew more and more. From her breast it ran into her arms and
      legs, and it seemed that a light fresh breeze blew over her head, stirring
      her hair. Her shoulders trembled with quiet laughter. The table and the
      lampglass trembled. Tears from her eyes splashed the letter. She was
      powerless to stop her laughter; and to convince herself that she had a
      reason for it, she hastened to remember something funny.
    

      "What a funny poodle!" she cried, feeling that she was choking with
      laughter. "What a funny poodle!"
    

      She remembered how Gronsdiev was playing with Maxim the poodle after tea
      yesterday; how he told a story afterwards of a very clever poodle who was
      chasing a crow in the yard. The crow gave him a look and said:
    

      "Oh, you swindler!"
    

      The poodle did not know he had to do with a learned crow. He was terribly
      confused, and ran away dumfounded. Afterwards he began to bark.
    

      "No, I'd better love Gronsdiev," Nadya decided and tore up the letter.
    

      She began to think of the student, of his love, of her own love, with the
      result that the thoughts in her head swam apart and she thought about
      everything, about her mother, the street, the pencil, the piano. She was
      happy thinking, and found that everything was good, magnificent. Her
      happiness told her that this was not all, that a little later it would be
      still better. Soon it will be spring, summer. They will go with mother to
      Gorbiki in the country. Gorny will come for his holidays. He will walk in
      the orchard with her, and make love to her. Gronsdiev will come too. He
      will play croquet with her and bowls. He will tell funny, wonderful
      stories. She passionately longed for the orchard, the darkness, the pure
      sky, the stars. Again her shoulders trembled with laughter and she seemed
      to awake to a smell of wormwood in the room; and a branch was tapping at
      the window.
    

      She went to her bed and sat down. She did not know what to do with her
      great happiness. It overwhelmed her. She stared at the crucifix which hung
      at the head of her bed and saying:
    

      "Dear God, dear God, dear God."
    





      Ivan Ivanich Lapkin, a pleasant looking young man, and Anna Zamblizky, a
      young girl with a little snub nose, walked down the sloping bank and sat
      down on the bench. The bench was close to the water's edge, among thick
      bushes of young willow. A heavenly spot! You sat down, and you were hidden
      from the world. Only the fish could see you and the catspaws which flashed
      over the water like lightning. The two young persons were equipped with
      rods, fish hooks, bags, tins of worms and everything else necessary. Once
      seated, they immediately began to fish.
    

      "I am glad that we're left alone at last," said Lapkin, looking round.
      I've got a lot to tell you, Anna—tremendous ... when I saw you for
      the first time ... you've got a nibble ... I understood then—why I
      am alive, I knew where my idol was, to whom I can devote my honest,
      hardworking life.... It must be a big one ... it is biting.... When I saw
      you—for the first time in my life I fell in love—fell in love
      passionately I Don't pull. Let it go on biting.... Tell me, darling, tell
      me—will you let me hope? No! I'm not worth it. I dare not even think
      of it—may I hope for.... Pull!
    

      Anna lifted her hand that held the rod—pulled, cried out. A silvery
      green fish shone in the air.
    

      "Goodness! it's a perch! Help—quick! It's slipping off." The perch
      tore itself from the hook—danced in the grass towards its native
      element and ... leaped into the water.
    

      But instead of the little fish that he was chasing, Lapkin quite by
      accident caught hold of Anna's hand—quite by accident pressed it to
      his lips. She drew back, but it was too late; quite by accident their lips
      met and kissed; yes, it was an absolute accident! They kissed and kissed.
      Then came vows and assurances.... Blissful moments! But there is no such
      thing as absolute happiness in this life. If happiness itself does not
      contain a poison, poison will enter in from without. Which happened this
      time. Suddenly, while the two were kissing, a laugh was heard. They looked
      at the river and were paralysed. The schoolboy Kolia, Anna's brother, was
      standing in the water, watching the young people and maliciously laughing.
    

      "Ah—ha! Kissing!" said he. "Right O, I'll tell Mother."
    

      "I hope that you—as a man of honour," Lapkin muttered, blushing.
      "It's disgusting to spy on us, it's loathsome to tell tales, it's rotten.
      As a man of honour...."
    

      "Give me a shilling, then I'll shut up!" the man of honour retorted. "If
      you don't, I'll tell."
    

      Lapkin took a shilling out of his pocket and gave it to Kolia, who
      squeezed it in his wet fist, whistled, and swam away. And the young people
      did not kiss any more just then.
    

      Next day Lapkin brought Kolia some paints and a ball from town, and his
      sister gave him all her empty pill boxes. Then they had to present him
      with a set of studs like dogs' heads. The wretched boy enjoyed this game
      immensely, and to keep it going he began to spy on them. Wherever Lapkin
      and Anna went, he was there too. He did not leave them alone for a single
      moment.
    

      "Beast!" Lapkin gnashed his teeth. "So young and yet such a full fledged
      scoundrel. What on earth will become of him later!"
    

      During the whole of July the poor lovers had no life apart from him. He
      threatened to tell on them; he dogged them and demanded more presents.
      Nothing satisfied him—finally he hinted at a gold watch. All right,
      they had to promise the watch.
    

      Once, at table, when biscuits were being handed round, he burst out
      laughing and said to Lapkin: "Shall I let on? Ah—ha!"
    

      Lapkin blushed fearfully and instead of a biscuit he began to chew his
      table napkin. Anna jumped up from the table and rushed out of the room.
    

      And this state of things went on until the end of August, up to the day
      when Lapkin at last proposed to Anna. Ah! What a happy day that was! When
      he had spoken to her parents and obtained their consent Lapkin rushed into
      the garden after Kolia. When he found him he nearly cried for joy and
      caught hold of the wretched boy by the ear. Anna, who was also looking for
      Kolia came running up and grabbed him by the other ear. You should have
      seen the happiness depicted on their faces while Kolia roared and begged
      them:
    

      "Darling, precious pets, I won't do it again. O-oh—O-oh! Forgive
      me!" And both of them confessed afterwards that during all the time they
      were in love with each other they never experienced such happiness, such
      overwhelming joy as during those moments when they pulled the wretched
      boy's ears.
    





      About ten o'clock of a dark September evening the Zemstvo doctor Kirilov's
      only son, six-year-old Andrey, died of diphtheria. As the doctor's wife
      dropped on to her knees before the dead child's cot and the first paroxysm
      of despair took hold of her, the bell rang sharply in the hall.
    

      When the diphtheria came all the servants were sent away from the house,
      that very morning. Kirilov himself went to the door, just as he was, in
      his shirt-sleeves with his waistcoat unbuttoned, without wiping his wet
      face or hands, which had been burnt with carbolic acid. It was dark in the
      hall, and of the person who entered could be distinguished only his middle
      height, a white scarf and a big, extraordinarily pale face, so pale that
      it seemed as though its appearance made the hall brighter....
    

      "Is the doctor in?" the visitor asked abruptly.
    

      "I'm at home," answered Kirilov. "What do you want?"
    

      "Oh, you're the doctor? I'm so glad!" The visitor was overjoyed and began
      to seek for the doctor's hand in the darkness. He found it and squeezed it
      hard in his own. "I'm very ... very glad! We were introduced ... I am
      Aboguin ... had the pleasure of meeting you this summer at Mr. Gnouchev's.
      I am very glad to have found you at home.... For God's sake, don't say you
      won't come with me immediately.... My wife has been taken dangerously
      ill.... I have the carriage with me...."
    

      From the visitor's voice and movements it was evident that he had been in
      a state of violent agitation. Exactly as though he had been frightened by
      a fire or a mad dog, he could hardly restrain his hurried breathing, and
      he spoke quickly in a trembling voice. In his speech there sounded a note
      of real sincerity, of childish fright. Like all men who are frightened and
      dazed, he spoke in short, abrupt phrases and uttered many superfluous,
      quite unnecessary, words.
    

      "I was afraid I shouldn't find you at home," he continued. "While I was
      coming to you I suffered terribly.... Dress yourself and let us go, for
      God's sake.... It happened like this. Papchinsky came to me—Alexander
      Siemionovich, you know him.... We were chatting.... Then we sat down to
      tea. Suddenly my wife cries out, presses her hands to her heart, and falls
      back in her chair. We carried her off to her bed and ... and I rubbed her
      forehead with sal-volatile, and splashed her with water.... She lies like
      a corpse.... I'm afraid that her heart's failed.... Let us go.... Her
      father too died of heart-failure."
    

      Kirilov listened in silence as though he did not understand the Russian
      language.
    

      When Aboguin once more mentioned Papchinsky and his wife's father, and
      once more began to seek for the doctor's hand in the darkness, the doctor
      shook his head and said, drawling each word listlessly:
    

      "Excuse me, but I can't go.... Five minutes ago my ... my son died."
    

      "Is that true?" Aboguin whispered, stepping back. "My God, what an awful
      moment to come! It's a terribly fated day ... terribly! What a coincidence
      ... and it might have been on purpose!"
    

      Aboguin took hold of the door handle and drooped his head in meditation.
      Evidently he was hesitating, not knowing whether to go away, or to ask the
      doctor once more.
    

      "Listen," he said eagerly, seizing Kirilov by the sleeve. "I fully
      understand your state! God knows I'm ashamed to try to hold your attention
      at such a moment, but what can I do? Think yourself—who can I go to?
      There isn't another doctor here besides you. For heaven's sake come. I'm
      not asking for myself. It's not I that's ill!"
    

      Silence began. Kirilov turned his back to Aboguin, stood still for a while
      and slowly went out of the hall into the drawing-room. To judge by his
      uncertain, machine-like movement, and by the attentiveness with which he
      arranged the hanging shade on the unlighted lamp in the drawing-room and
      consulted a thick book which lay on the table—at such a moment he
      had neither purpose nor desire, nor did he think of anything, and probably
      had already forgotten that there was a stranger standing in his hall. The
      gloom and the quiet of the drawing-room apparently increased his insanity.
      As he went from the drawing-room to his study he raised his right foot
      higher than he need, felt with his hands for the door-posts, and then one
      felt a certain perplexity in his whole figure, as though he had entered a
      strange house by chance, or for the first time in his life had got drunk,
      and now was giving himself up in bewilderment to the new sensation. A wide
      line of light stretched across the bookshelves on one wall of the study;
      this light, together with the heavy stifling smell of carbolic acid and
      ether came from the door ajar that led from the study into the
      bed-room.... The doctor sank into a chair before the table; for a while he
      looked drowsily at the shining books, then rose and went into the
      bed-room.
    

      Here, in the bed-room, dead quiet reigned. Everything, down to the last
      trifle, spoke eloquently of the tempest undergone, of weariness, and
      everything rested. The candle which stood among a close crowd of phials,
      boxes and jars on the stool and the big lamp on the chest of drawers
      brightly lit the room. On the bed, by the window, the boy lay open-eyed,
      with a look of wonder on his face. He did not move, but it seemed that his
      open eyes became darker and darker every second and sank into his skull.
      Having laid her hands on his body and hid her face in the folds of the
      bed-clothes, the mother now was on her knees before the bed. Like the boy
      she did not move, but how much living movement was felt in the coil of her
      body and in her hands! She was pressing close to the bed with her whole
      being, with eager vehemence, as though she were afraid to violate the
      quiet and comfortable pose which she had found at last for her weary body.
      Blankets, cloths, basins, splashes on the floor, brushes and spoons
      scattered everywhere, a white bottle of lime-water, the stifling heavy air
      itself—everything died away, and as it were plunged into quietude.
    

      The doctor stopped by his wife, thrust his hands into his trouser pockets
      and bending his head on one side looked fixedly at his son. His face
      showed indifference; only the drops which glistened on his beard revealed
      that he had been lately weeping.
    

      The repulsive terror of which we think when we speak of death was absent
      from the bed-room. In the pervading dumbness, in the mother's pose, in the
      indifference of the doctor's face was something attractive that touched
      the heart, the subtle and elusive beauty of human grief, which it will
      take men long to understand and describe, and only music, it seems, is
      able to express. Beauty too was felt in the stern stillness. Kirilov and
      his wife were silent and did not weep, as though they confessed all the
      poetry of their condition. As once the season of their youth passed away,
      so now in this boy their right to bear children had passed away, alas! for
      ever to eternity. The doctor is forty-four years old, already grey and
      looks like an old man; his faded sick wife is thirty-five. Audrey was not
      merely the only son but the last.
    

      In contrast to his wife the doctor's nature belonged to those which feel
      the necessity of movement when their soul is in pain. After standing by
      his wife for about five minutes, he passed from the bed-room, lifting his
      right foot too high, into a little room half filled with a big broad
      divan. From there he went to the kitchen. After wandering about the
      fireplace and the cook's bed, he stooped through a little door and came
      into the hall.
    

      Here he saw the white scarf and the pale face again.
    

      "At last," sighed Aboguin, seizing the doorhandle. "Let us go, please."
    

      The doctor shuddered, glanced at him and remembered.
    

      "Listen. I've told you already that I can't go," he said, livening. "What
      a strange idea!"
    

      "Doctor, I'm made of flesh and blood, too. I fully understand your
      condition. I sympathise with you," Aboguin said in an imploring voice,
      putting his hand to his scarf. "But I am not asking for myself. My wife is
      dying. If you had heard her cry, if you'd seen her face, you would
      understand my insistence! My God—and I thought that you'd gone to
      dress yourself. The time is precious, Doctor! Let us go, I beg of you."
    

      "I can't come," Kirilov said after a pause, and stepped into his
      drawing-room.
    

      Aboguin followed him and seized him by the sleeve.
    

      "You're in sorrow. I understand. But I'm not asking you to cure a
      toothache, or to give expert evidence,—but to save a human life." He
      went on imploring like a beggar. "This life is more than any personal
      grief. I ask you for courage, for a brave deed—in the name of
      humanity."
    

      "Humanity cuts both ways," Kirilov said irritably. "In the name of the
      same humanity I ask you not to take me away. My God, what a strange idea!
      I can hardly stand on my feet and you frighten me with humanity. I'm not
      fit for anything now. I won't go for anything. With whom shall I leave my
      wife? No, no...."
    

      Kirilov flung out his open hands and drew back.
    

      "And ... and don't ask me," he continued, disturbed. "I'm sorry.... Under
      the Laws, Volume XIII., I'm obliged to go and you have the right to drag
      me by the neck.... Well, drag me, but ... I'm not fit.... I'm not even
      able to speak. Excuse me."
    

      "It's quite unfair to speak to me in that tone, Doctor," said Aboguin,
      again taking the doctor by the sleeve. "The thirteenth volume be damned! I
      have no right to do violence to your will. If you want to, come; if you
      don't, then God be with you; but it's not to your will that I apply, but
      to your feelings. A young woman is dying! You say your son died just now.
      Who could understand my terror better than you?"
    

      Aboguin's voice trembled with agitation. His tremor and his tone were much
      more convincing than his words. Aboguin was sincere, but it is remarkable
      that every phrase he used came out stilted, soulless, inopportunely
      florid, and as it were insulted the atmosphere of the doctor's house and
      the woman who was dying. He felt it himself, and in his fear of being
      misunderstood he exerted himself to the utmost to make his voice soft and
      tender so as to convince by the sincerity of his tone at least, if not by
      his words. As a rule, however deep and beautiful the words they affect
      only the unconcerned. They cannot always satisfy those who are happy or
      distressed because the highest expression of happiness or distress is most
      often silence. Lovers understand each other best when they are silent, and
      a fervent passionate speech at the graveside affects only outsiders. To
      the widow and children it seems cold and trivial.
    

      Kirilov stood still and was silent. When Aboguin uttered some more words
      on the higher vocation of a doctor, and self-sacrifice, the doctor sternly
      asked:
    

      "Is it far?"
    

      "Thirteen or fourteen versts. I've got good horses, doctor. I give you my
      word of honour that I'll take you there and back in an hour. Only an
      hour."
    

      The last words impressed the doctor more strongly than the references to
      humanity or the doctor's vocation. He thought for a while and said with a
      sigh.
    

      "Well, let us go!"
    

      He went off quickly, with a step that was now sure, to his study and soon
      after returned in a long coat. Aboguin, delighted, danced impatiently
      round him, helped him on with his overcoat, and accompanied him out of the
      house.
    

      Outside it was dark, but brighter than in the hall. Now in the darkness
      the tall stooping figure of the doctor was clearly visible with the long,
      narrow beard and the aquiline nose. Besides his pale face Aboguin's big
      face could now be seen and a little student's cap which hardly covered the
      crown of his head. The scarf showed white only in front, but behind it was
      hid under his long hair.
    

      "Believe me, I'm able to appreciate your magnanimity," murmured Aboguin,
      as he helped the doctor to a seat in the carriage. "We'll whirl away.
      Luke, dear man, drive as fast as you can, do!"
    

      The coachman drove quickly. First appeared a row of bare buildings, which
      stood along the hospital yard. It was dark everywhere, save that at the
      end of the yard a bright light from someone's window broke through the
      garden fence, and three windows in the upper story of the separate house
      seemed to be paler than the air. Then the carriage drove into dense
      obscurity where you could smell mushroom damp, and hear the whisper of the
      trees. The noise of the wheels awoke the rooks who began to stir in the
      leaves and raised a doleful, bewildered cry as if they knew that the
      doctor's son was dead and Aboguin's wife ill. Then began to appear
      separate trees, a shrub. Sternly gleamed the pond, where big black shadows
      slept. The carriage rolled along over an even plain. Now the cry of the
      rooks was but faintly heard far away behind. Soon it became completely
      still.
    

      Almost all the way Kirilov and Aboguin were silent; save that once Aboguin
      sighed profoundly and murmured.
    

      "It's terrible pain. One never loves his nearest so much as when there is
      the risk of losing them."
    

      And when the carriage was quietly passing through the river, Kirilov gave
      a sudden start, as though the dashing of the water frightened him, and he
      began to move impatiently.
    

      "Let me go," he said in anguish. "I'll come to you later. I only want to
      send the attendant to my wife. She is all alone."
    

      Aboguin was silent. The carriage, swaying and rattling against the stones,
      drove over the sandy bank and went on. Kirilov began to toss about in
      anguish, and glanced around. Behind the road was visible in the scant
      light of the stars and the willows that fringed the bank disappearing into
      the darkness. To the right the plain stretched smooth and boundless as
      heaven. On it in the distance here and there dim lights were burning,
      probably on the turf-pits. To the left, parallel with the road stretched a
      little hill, tufted with tiny shrubs, and on the hill a big half-moon
      stood motionless, red, slightly veiled with a mist, and surrounded with
      fine clouds which seemed to be gazing upon it from every side, and
      guarding it, lest it should disappear.
    

      In all nature one felt something hopeless and sick. Like a fallen woman
      who sits alone in a dark room trying not to think of her past, the earth
      languished with reminiscence of spring and summer and waited in apathy for
      ineluctable winter. Wherever one's glance turned nature showed everywhere
      like a dark, cold, bottomless pit, whence neither Kirilov nor Aboguin nor
      the red half-moon could escape....
    

      The nearer the carriage approached the destination the more impatient did
      Aboguin become. He moved about, jumped up and stared over the driver's
      shoulder in front of him. And when at last the carriage drew up at the
      foot of the grand staircase, nicely covered with a striped linen awning
      and he looked up at the lighted windows of the first floor one could hear
      his breath trembling.
    

      "If anything happens ... I shan't survive it," he said entering the hall
      with the doctor and slowly rubbing his hands in his agitation. "But I
      can't hear any noise. That means it's all right so far," he added,
      listening to the stillness.
    

      No voices or steps were heard in the hall. For all the bright illumination
      the whole house seemed asleep. Now the doctor and Aboguin who had been in
      darkness up till now could examine each other. The doctor was tall, with a
      stoop, slovenly dressed, and his face was plain. There was something
      unpleasantly sharp, ungracious, and severe in his thick negro lips, his
      aquiline nose and his faded, indifferent look. His tangled hair, his
      sunken temples, the early grey in his long thin beard, that showed his
      shining chin, his pale grey complexion and the slipshod awkwardness of his
      manners—the hardness of it all suggested to the mind bad times
      undergone, an unjust lot and weariness of life and men. To look at the
      hard figure of the man, you could not believe that he had a wife and could
      weep over his child. Aboguin revealed something different. He was robust,
      solid and fair-haired, with a big head and large, yet soft, features,
      exquisitely dressed in the latest fashion. In his carriage, his
      tight-buttoned coat and his mane of hair you felt something noble and
      leonine. He walked with his head straight and his chest prominent, he
      spoke in a pleasant baritone, and in his manner of removing his scarf or
      arranging his hair there appeared a subtle, almost feminine, elegance.
      Even his pallor and childish fear as he glanced upwards to the staircase
      while taking off his coat, did not disturb his carriage or take from the
      satisfaction, the health and aplomb which his figure breathed.
    

      "There's no one about, nothing I can hear," he said walking upstairs. "No
      commotion. May God be good!"
    

      He accompanied the doctor through the hall to a large salon, where a big
      piano showed dark and a lustre hung in a white cover. Thence they both
      passed into a small and beautiful drawing-room, very cosy, filled with a
      pleasant, rosy half-darkness.
    

      "Please sit here a moment, Doctor," said Aboguin, "I ... I won't be a
      second. I'll just have a look and tell them."
    

      Kirilov was left alone. The luxury of the drawing-room, the pleasant
      half-darkness, even his presence in a stranger's unfamiliar house
      evidently did not move him. He sat in a chair looking at his hands burnt
      with carbolic acid. He had no more than a glimpse of the bright red
      lampshade, the cello case, and when he looked sideways across the room to
      where the dock was ticking, he noticed a stuffed wolf, as solid and
      satisfied as Aboguin himself.
    

      It was still.... Somewhere far away in the other rooms someone uttered a
      loud "Ah!" A glass door, probably a cupboard door, rang, and again
      everything was still. After five minutes had passed, Kirilov did not look
      at his hands any more. He raised his eyes to the door through which
      Aboguin had disappeared.
    

      Aboguin was standing on the threshold, but not the same man as went out.
      The expression of satisfaction and subtle elegance had disappeared from
      him. His face and hands, the attitude of his body were distorted with a
      disgusting expression either of horror or of tormenting physical pain. His
      nose, lips, moustache, all his features were moving and as it were trying
      to tear themselves away from his face, but the eyes were as though
      laughing from pain.
    

      Aboguin took a long heavy step into the middle of the room, stooped,
      moaned, and shook his fists.
    

      "Deceived!" he cried, emphasising the syllable cei. "She deceived
      me! She's gone! She fell ill and sent me for the doctor only to run away
      with this fool Papchinsky. My God!" Aboguin stepped heavily towards the
      doctor, thrust his white soft fists before his face, and went on wailing,
      shaking his fists the while.
    

      "She's gone off! She's deceived me! But why this lie? My God, my God! Why
      this dirty, foul trick, this devilish, serpent's game? What have I done to
      her? She's gone off." Tears gushed from his eyes. He turned on his heel
      and began to pace the drawing-room. Now in his short jacket and his
      fashionable narrow trousers in which his legs seemed too thin for his
      body, he was extraordinarily like a lion. Curiosity kindled in the
      doctor's impassive face. He rose and eyed Aboguin.
    

      "Well, where's the patient?"
    

      "The patient, the patient," cried Aboguin, laughing, weeping, and still
      shaking his fists. "She's not ill, but accursed. Vile—dastardly. The
      Devil himself couldn't have planned a fouler trick. She sent me so that
      she could run away with a fool, an utter clown, an Alphonse! My God, far
      better she should have died. I'll not bear it. I shall not bear it."
    

      The doctor stood up straight. His eyes began to blink, filled with tears;
      his thin beard began to move with his jaw right and left.
    

      "What's this?" he asked, looking curiously about. "My child's dead. My
      wife in anguish, alone in all the house.... I can hardly stand on my feet,
      I haven't slept for three nights ... and I'm made to play in a vulgar
      comedy, to play the part of a stage property! I don't ... I don't
      understand it!"
    

      Aboguin opened one fist, flung a crumpled note on the floor and trod on
      it, as upon an insect he wished to crush.
    

      "And I didn't see ... didn't understand," he said through his set teeth,
      brandishing one fist round his head, with an expression as though someone
      had trod on a corn. "I didn't notice how he came to see us every day. I
      didn't notice that he came in a carriage to-day! What was the carriage
      for? And I didn't see! Innocent!"
    

      "I don't ... I don't understand," the doctor murmured. "What's it all
      mean? It's jeering at a man, laughing at a man's suffering! That's
      impossible.... I've never seen it in my life before!"
    

      With the dull bewilderment of a man who has just begun to understand that
      someone has bitterly offended him, the doctor shrugged his shoulders,
      waved his hands and not knowing what to say or do, dropped exhausted into
      a chair.
    

      "Well, she didn't love me any more. She loved another man. Very well. But
      why the deceit, why this foul treachery?" Aboguin spoke with tears in his
      voice. "Why, why? What have I done to you? Listen, doctor," he said
      passionately approaching Kirilov. "You were the unwilling witness of my
      misfortune, and I am not going to hide the truth from you. I swear I loved
      this woman. I loved her with devotion, like a slave. I sacrificed
      everything for her. I broke with my family, I gave up the service and my
      music. I forgave her things I could not have forgiven my mother and
      sister.... I never once gave her an angry look ... I never gave her any
      cause. Why this lie then? I do not demand love, but why this abominable
      deceit? If you don't love any more then speak out honestly, above all when
      you know what I feel about this matter...."
    

      With tears in his eyes and trembling in all his bones, Aboguin was pouring
      out his soul to the doctor. He spoke passionately, pressing both hands to
      his heart. He revealed all the family secrets without hesitation, as
      though he were glad that these secrets were being tom from his heart. Had
      he spoken thus for an hour or two and poured out all his soul, he would
      surely have been easier.
    

      Who can say whether, had the doctor listened and given him friendly
      sympathy, he would not, as so often happens, have been reconciled to his
      grief unprotesting, without turning to unprofitable follies? But it
      happened otherwise. While Aboguin was speaking the offended doctor changed
      countenance visibly. The indifference and amazement in his face gradually
      gave way to an expression of bitter outrage, indignation, and anger. His
      features became still sharper, harder, and more forbidding. When Aboguin
      put before his eyes the photograph of his young wife, with a pretty, but
      dry, inexpressive face like a nun's, and asked if it were possible to look
      at that face and grant that it could express a lie, the doctor suddenly
      started away, with flashing eyes, and said, coarsely forging out each
      several word:
    

      "Why do you tell me all this? I do not want to hear! I don't want to," he
      cried and banged his fist upon the table. "I don't want your trivial
      vulgar secrets—to Hell with them. You dare not tell me such
      trivialities. Or do you think I have not yet been insulted enough! That
      I'm a lackey to whom you can give the last insult? Yes?"
    

      Aboguin drew back from Kirilov and stared at him in surprise.
    

      "Why did you bring me here?" the doctor went on, shaking his beard. "You
      marry out of high spirits, get angry out of high spirits, and make a
      melodrama—but where do I come in? What have I got to do with your
      romances? Leave me alone I Get on with your noble grabbing, parade your
      humane ideas, play—" the doctor gave a side-glance at the cello-case—"the
      double-bass and the trombone, stuff yourselves like capons, but don't dare
      to jeer at a real man! If you can't respect him, then you can at least
      spare him your attentions."
    

      "What does all this mean?" Aboguin asked, blushing.
    

      "It means that it's vile and foul to play with a man I I'm a doctor. You
      consider doctors and all men who work and don't reek of scent and
      harlotry, your footmen, your mauvais tons. Very well, but no one
      gave you the right to turn a man who suffers into a property."
    

      "How dare you say that?" Aboguin asked quietly. Again his face began to
      twist about, this time in visible anger.
    

      "How dare you bring me here to listen to trivial rubbish, when you
      know that I'm in sorrow?" the doctor cried and banged his fists on the
      table once more. "Who gave you the right to jeer at another's grief?"
    

      "You're mad," cried Aboguin. "You're ungenerous. I too am deeply unhappy
      and ... and ..."
    

      "Unhappy"—the doctor gave a sneering laugh—"Don't touch the
      word, it's got nothing to do with you. Wasters who can't get money on a
      bill call themselves unhappy too. A capon's unhappy, oppressed with all
      its superfluous fat. You worthless lot!"
    

      "Sir, you're forgetting yourself," Aboguin gave a piercing scream. "For
      words like those, people are beaten. Do you understand?"
    

      Aboguin thrust his hand into his side pocket, took out a pocket-book,
      found two notes and flung them on the table.
    

      "There's your fee," he said, and his nostrils trembled. "You're paid."
    

      "You dare not offer me money," said the doctor, and brushed the notes from
      the table to the floor. "You don't settle an insult with money."
    

      Aboguin and the doctor stood face to face, heaping each other with
      undeserved insults. Never in their lives, even in a frenzy, had they said
      so much that was unjust and cruel and absurd. In both the selfishness of
      the unhappy is violently manifest. Unhappy men are selfish, wicked,
      unjust, and less able to understand each other than fools. Unhappiness
      does not unite people, but separates them; and just where one would
      imagine that people should be united by the community of grief, there is
      more injustice and cruelty done than among the comparatively contented.
    

      "Send me home, please," the doctor cried, out of breath.
    

      Aboguin rang the bell violently. Nobody came. He rang once more; then
      flung the bell angrily to the floor. It struck dully on the carpet and
      gave out a mournful sound like a death-moan. The footman appeared.
    

      "Where have you been hiding, damn you?" The master sprang upon him with
      clenched fists. "Where have you been just now? Go away and tell them to
      said the carriage round for this gentleman, and get the brougham ready for
      me. Wait," he called out as the footman turned to go. "Not a single
      traitor remains to-morrow. Pack off all of you! I will engage new ones ...
      Rabble!"
    

      While they waited Aboguin and the doctor were silent. Already the
      expression of satisfaction and the subtle elegance had returned to the
      former. He paced the drawing-room, shook his head elegantly and evidently
      was planning something. His anger was not yet cool, but he tried to make
      as if he did not notice his enemy.... The doctor stood with one hand on
      the edge of the table, looking at Aboguin with that deep, rather cynical,
      ugly contempt with which only grief and an unjust lot can look, when they
      see satiety and elegance before them.
    

      A little later, when the doctor took his seat in the carriage and drove
      away, his eyes still glanced contemptuously. It was dark, much darker than
      an hour ago. The red half-moon had now disappeared behind the little hill,
      and the clouds which watched it lay in dark spots round the stars. The
      brougham with the red lamps began to rattle on the road and passed the
      doctor. It was Aboguin on his way to protest, to commit all manner of
      folly.
    

      All the way the doctor thought not of his wife or Andrey, but only of
      Aboguin and those who lived in the house he just left. His thoughts were
      unjust, inhuman, and cruel. He passed sentence on Aboguin, his wife,
      Papchinsky, and all those who live in rosy semi-darkness and smell of
      scent. All the way he hated them, and his heart ached with his contempt
      for them. The conviction he formed about them would last his life long.
    

      Time will pass and Kirilov's sorrow, but this conviction, unjust and
      unworthy of the human heart, will not pass, but will remain in the
      doctor's mind until the grave.
    





      Nicolai Ilyich Byelyaev, a Petersburg landlord, very fond of the
      racecourse, a well fed, pink young man of about thirty-two, once called
      towards evening on Madame Irnin—Olga Ivanovna—with whom he had
      a liaison, or, to use his own phrase, spun out a long and tedious
      romance. And indeed the first pages of this romance, pages of interest and
      inspiration, had been read long ago; now they dragged on and on, and
      presented neither novelty nor interest.
    

      Finding that Olga Ivanovna was not at home, my hero lay down a moment on
      the drawing-room sofa and began to wait.
    

      "Good evening, Nicolai Ilyich," he suddenly heard a child's voice say.
      "Mother will be in in a moment. She's gone to the dressmaker's with
      Sonya."
    

      In the same drawing-room on the sofa lay Olga Vassilievna's son, Alyosha,
      a boy about eight years old, well built, well looked after, dressed up
      like a picture in a velvet jacket and long black stockings. He lay on a
      satin pillow, and apparently imitating an acrobat whom he had lately seen
      in the circus, lifted up first one leg then the other. When his elegant
      legs began to be tired, he moved his hands, or he jumped up impetuously
      and then went on all fours, trying to stand with his legs in the air. All
      this he did with a most serious face, breathing heavily, as if he himself
      found no happiness in God's gift of such a restless body.
    

      "Ah, how do you do, my friend?" said Byelyaev. "Is it you? I didn't notice
      you. Is your mother well?"
    

      At the moment Alyosha had just taken hold of the toe of his left foot in
      his right hand and got into a most awkward pose. He turned head over
      heels, jumped up, and glanced from under the big, fluffy lampshade at
      Byelyaev.
    

      "How can I put it?" he said, shrugging his shoulders. "As a matter of
      plain fact mother is never well. You see she's a woman, and women, Nicolai
      Ilyich, have always some pain or another."
    

      For something to do, Byelyaev began to examine Alyosha's face. All the
      time he had been acquainted with Olga Ivanovna he had never once turned
      his attention to the boy and had completely ignored his existence. A boy
      is stuck in front of your eyes, but what is he doing here, what is his rÃ´le?—you
      don't want to give a single thought to the question.
    

      In the evening dusk Alyosha's face with a pale forehead and steady black
      eyes unexpectedly reminded Byelyaev of Olga Vassilievna as she was in the
      first pages of the romance. He had the desire to be affectionate to the
      boy.
    

      "Come here, whipper-snapper," he said. "Come and let me have a good look
      at you, quite close."
    

      The boy jumped off the sofa and ran to Byelyaev.
    

      "Well?" Nicolai Ilyich began, putting his hand on the thin shoulders. "And
      how are things with you?"
    

      "How shall I put it?... They used to be much better before."
    

      "How?"
    

      "Quite simple. Before, Sonya and I only had to do music and reading, and
      now we're given French verses to learn. You've had your hair cut lately?"
    

      "Yes, just lately."
    

      "That's why I noticed it. Your beard's shorter. May I touch it ... doesn't
      it hurt?"
    

      "No, not a bit."
    

      "Why is it that it hurts if you pull one hair, and when you pull a whole
      lot, it doesn't hurt a bit? Ah, ah I You know it's a pity you don't have
      side-whiskers. You should shave here, and at the sides ... and leave the
      hair just here."
    

      The boy pressed close to Byelyaev and began to play with his watch-chain.
    

      "When I go to the gymnasium," he said, "Mother is going to buy me a watch.
      I'll ask her to buy me a chain just like this. What a fine locket I Father
      has one just the same, but yours has stripes, here, and his has got
      letters.... Inside it's mother's picture. Father has another chain now,
      not in links, but like a ribbon...."
    

      "How do you know? Do you see your father?"
    

      "I? Mm ... no ... I ..."
    

      Alyosha blushed and in the violent confusion of being detected in a lie
      began to scratch the locket busily with his finger-nail. Byelyaev looked
      steadily at his face and asked:
    

      "Do you see your father?"
    

      "No ... no!"
    

      "But, be honest—on your honour. By your face I can see you're not
      telling me the truth. If you made a slip of the tongue by mistake, what's
      the use of shuffling. Tell me, do you see him? As one friend to another."
    

      Alyosha mused.
    

      "And you won't tell Mother?" he asked.
    

      "What next."
    

      "On your word of honour."
    

      "My word of honour."
    

      "Swear an oath."
    

      "What a nuisance you are! What do you take me for?"
    

      Alyosha looked round, made big eyes and began to whisper.
    

      "Only for God's sake don't tell Mother! Never tell it to anyone at all,
      because it's a secret. God forbid that Mother should ever get to know;
      then I and Sonya and Pelagueia will pay for it.... Listen. Sonya and I
      meet Father every Tuesday and Friday. When Pelagueia takes us for a walk
      before dinner, we go into Apfel's sweet-shop and Father's waiting for us.
      He always sits in a separate room, you know, where there's a splendid
      marble table and an ash-tray shaped like a goose without a back...."
    

      "And what do you do there?"
    

      "Nothing!—First, we welcome one another, then we sit down at a
      little table and Father begins to treat us to coffee and cakes. You know,
      Sonya eats meat-pies, and I can't bear pies with meat in them! I like them
      made of cabbage and eggs. We eat so much that afterwards at dinner we try
      to eat as much as we possibly can so that Mother shan't notice."
    

      "What do you talk about there?"
    

      "To Father? About anything. He kisses us and cuddles us, tells us all
      kinds of funny stories. You know, he says that he will take us to live
      with him when we are grown up. Sonya doesn't want to go, but I say 'Yes.'
      Of course, it'll be lonely without Mother; but I'll write letters to her.
      How funny: we could go to her for our holidays then—couldn't we?
      Besides, Father says that he'll buy me a horse. He's a splendid man. I
      can't understand why Mother doesn't invite him to live with her or why she
      says we mustn't meet him. He loves Mother very much indeed. He's always
      asking us how she is and what she's doing. When she was ill, he took hold
      of his head like this ... and ran, ran, all the time. He is always telling
      us to obey and respect her. Tell me, is it true that we're unlucky?"
    

      "H'm ... how?"
    

      "Father says so. He says: 'You are unlucky children.' It's quite strange
      to listen to him. He says: 'You are unhappy, I'm unhappy, and Mother's
      unhappy.' He says: 'Pray to God for yourselves and for her.'" Alyosha's
      eyes rested upon the stuffed bird and he mused.
    

      "Exactly...." snorted Byelyaev. "This is what you do. You arrange
      conferences in sweet-shops. And your mother doesn't know?" "N—no....
      How could she know? Pelagueia won't tell for anything. The day before
      yesterday Father stood us pears. Sweet, like jam. I had two."
    

      "H'm ... well, now ... tell me, doesn't your father speak about me?"
    

      "About you? How shall I put it?" Alyosha gave a searching glance to
      Byelyaev's face and shrugged his shoulders.
    

      "He doesn't say anything in particular."
    

      "What does he say, for instance?"
    

      "You won't be offended?"
    

      "What next? Why, does he abuse me?"
    

      "He doesn't abuse you, but you know ... he is cross with you. He says that
      it's through you that Mother's unhappy and that you ... ruined Mother. But
      he is so queer! I explain to him that you are good and never shout at
      Mother, but he only shakes his head."
    

      "Does he say those very words: that I ruined her?"
    

      "Yes. Don't be offended, Nicolai Ilyich!"
    

      Byelyaev got up, stood still a moment, and then began to walk about the
      drawing-room.
    

      "This is strange, and ... funny," he murmured, shrugging his shoulders and
      smiling ironically. "He is to blame all round, and now I've ruined her,
      eh? What an innocent lamb! Did he say those very words to you: that I
      ruined your mother?"
    

      "Yes, but ... you said that you wouldn't get offended."
    

      "I'm not offended, and ... and it's none of your business! No, it ... it's
      quite funny though. I fell, into the trap, yet I'm to be blamed as well."
    

      The bell rang. The boy dashed from his place and ran out. In a minute a
      lady entered the room with a little girl. It was Olga Ivanovna, Alyosha's
      mother. After her, hopping, humming noisily, and waving his hands,
      followed Alyosha.
    

      "Of course, who is there to accuse except me?" he murmured, sniffing.
      "He's right, he's the injured husband."
    

      "What's the matter?" asked Olga Ivanovna.
    

      "What's the matter! Listen to the kind of sermon your dear husband
      preaches. It appears I'm a scoundrel and a murderer, I've ruined you and
      the children. All of you are unhappy, and only I am awfully happy!
      Awfully, awfully happy!"
    

      "I don't understand, Nicolai! What is it?"
    

      "Just listen to this young gentleman," Byelyaev said, pointing to Alyosha.
    

      Alyosha blushed, then became pale suddenly and his whole face was twisted
      in fright.
    

      "Nicolai Ilyich," he whispered loudly. "Shh!"
    

      Olga Ivanovna glanced in surprise at Alyosha, at Byelyaev, and then again
      at Alyosha.
    

      "Ask him, if you please," went on Byelyaev. "That stupid fool Pelagueia of
      yours, takes them to sweet-shops and arranges meetings with their dear
      father there. But that's not the point. The point is that the dear father
      is a martyr, and I'm a murderer, I'm a scoundrel, who broke the lives of
      both of you...."
    

      "Nicolai Ilyich!" moaned Alyosha. "You gave your word of honour!"
    

      "Ah, let me alone!" Byelyaev waved his hand. "This is something more
      important than any words of honour. The hypocrisy revolts me, the lie!"
    

      "I don't understand," muttered Olga Ivanovna, and tears began to glimmer
      in her eyes. "Tell me, Lyolka,"—she turned to her son, "Do you see
      your father?"
    

      Alyosha did not hear and looked with horror at Byelyaev.
    

      "It's impossible," said the mother. "I'll go and ask Pelagueia."
    

      Olga Ivanovna went out.
    

      "But, but you gave me your word of honour," Alyosha said trembling all
      over.
    

      Byelyaev waved his hand at him and went on walking up and down. He was
      absorbed in his insult, and now, as before, he did not notice the presence
      of the boy. He, a big serious man, had nothing to do with boys. And
      Alyosha sat down in a corner and in terror told Sonya how he had been
      deceived. He trembled, stammered, wept. This was the first time in his
      life that he had been set, roughly, face to face with a lie. He had never
      known before that in this world besides sweet pears and cakes and
      expensive watches, there exist many other things which have no name in
      children's language.
    





      When she came out of the hospital the charming Vanda, or, according to her
      passport, "the honourable lady-citizen Nastasya Kanavkina," found herself
      in a position in which she had never been before: without a roof and
      without a son. What was to be done?
    

      First of all, she went to a pawnshop to pledge her turquoise ring, her
      only jewellery. They gave her a rouble for the ring ... but what can you
      buy for a rouble? For that you can't get a short jacket Ã  la mode,
      or an elaborate hat, or a pair of brown shoes; yet without these things
      she felt naked. She felt as though, not only the people, but even the
      horses and dogs were staring at her and laughing at the plainness of her
      clothes. And her only thought was for her clothes; she did not care at all
      what she ate or where she slept.
    

      "If only I were to meet a gentleman friend...." she thought. "I could get
      some money ... Nobody would say 'No,' because...."
    

      But she came across no gentleman Mends. It's easy to find them of nights
      in the Renaissance, but they wouldn't let her go into the Renaissance
      in that plain dress and without a hat. What's to be done? After a long
      time of anguish, vexed and weary with walking, sitting, and thinking,
      Vanda made up her mind to play her last card: to go straight to the rooms
      of some gentleman friend and ask him for money.
    

      "But who shall I go to?" she pondered. "I can't possibly go to Misha ...
      he's got a family.... The ginger-headed old man is at his office...."
    

      Vanda recollected Finkel, the dentist, the converted Jew, who gave her a
      bracelet three months ago. Once she poured a glass of beer on his head at
      the German dub. She was awfully glad that she had thought of Finkel.
    

      "He'll be certain to give me some, if only I find him in..." she thought,
      on her way to him. "And if he won't, then I'll break every single thing
      there."
    

      She had her plan already prepared. She approached the dentist's door. She
      would run up the stairs, with a laugh, fly into his private room and ask
      for twenty-five roubles.... But when she took hold of the bell-pull, the
      plan went clean out of her head. Vanda suddenly began to be afraid and
      agitated, a thing which had never happened to her before. She was never
      anything but bold and independent in drunken company; but now, dressed in
      common clothes, and just like any ordinary person begging a favour, she
      felt timid and humble.
    

      "Perhaps he has forgotten me..." she thought, not daring to pull the bell.
      "And how can I go up to him in a dress like this? As if I were a pauper,
      or a dowdy respectable..."
    

      She rang the bell irresolutely.
    

      There were steps behind the door. It was the porter.
    

      "Is the doctor at home?" she asked.
    

      She would have been very pleased now if the porter had said "No," but
      instead of answering he showed her into the hall, and took her jacket. The
      stairs seemed to her luxurious and magnificent, but what she noticed first
      of all in all the luxury was a large mirror in which she saw a ragged
      creature without an elaborate hat, without a modish jacket, and without a
      pair of brown shoes. And Vanda found it strange that, now that she was
      poorly dressed and looking more like a seamstress or a washerwoman, for
      the first time she felt ashamed, and had no more assurance or boldness
      left. In her thoughts she began to call herself Nastya Kanavkina, instead
      of Vanda as she used.
    

      "This way, please!" said the maid-servant, leading her to the private
      room. "The doctor will be here immediately.... Please, take a seat."
    

      Vanda dropped into an easy chair.
    

      "I'll say: 'Lend me ...'" she thought. "That's the right thing, because we
      are acquainted. But the maid must go out of the room.... It's awkward in
      front of the maid.... What is she standing there for?"
    

      In five minutes the door opened and Finkel entered—a tall, swarthy,
      convert Jew, with fat cheeks and goggle-eyes. His cheeks, eyes, belly,
      fleshy hips—were all so full, repulsive, and coarse! At the Renaissance
      and the German club he used always to be a little drunk, to spend a lot of
      money on women, patiently put up with all their tricks—for instance,
      when Vanda poured the beer on his head, he only smiled and shook his
      finger at her—but now he looked dull and sleepy; he had the pompous,
      chilly expression of a superior, and he was chewing something.
    

      "What is the matter?" he asked, without looking at Vanda. Vanda glanced at
      the maid's serious face, at the blown-out figure of Finkel, who obviously
      did not recognise her, and she blushed.
    

      "What's the matter?" the dentist repeated, irritated.
    

      "To ... oth ache...." whispered Vanda.
    

      "Ah ... which tooth ... where?"
    

      Vanda remembered she had a tooth with a hole.
    

      "At the bottom ... to the right," she said.
    

      "H'm ... open your mouth."
    

      Finkel frowned, held his breath, and began to work the aching tooth loose.
    

      "Do you feel any pain?" he asked, picking at her tooth with some
      instrument.
    

      "Yes, I do...." Vanda lied. "Shall I remind him?" she thought, "he'll be
      sure to remember.... But ... the maid ... what is she standing there for?"
    

      Finkel suddenly snorted like a steam-engine straight into her mouth, and
      said:
    

      "I don't advise you to have a stopping.... Anyhow the tooth is quite
      useless."
    

      Again he picked at the tooth for a little, and soiled Vanda's lips and
      gums with his tobacco-stained fingers. Again he held his breath and dived
      into her mouth with something cold....
    

      Vanda suddenly felt a terrible pain, shrieked and seized Finkel's hand....
    

      "Never mind...." he murmured. "Don't be frightened.... This tooth isn't
      any use."
    

      And his tobacco-stained fingers, covered with blood, held up the extracted
      tooth before her eyes. The maid came forward and put a bowl to her lips.
    

      "Rinse your mouth with cold water at home," said Finkel. "That will make
      the blood stop."
    

      He stood before her in the attitude of a man impatient to be left alone at
      last.
    

      "Good-bye ..." she said, turning to the door.
    

      "H'm! And who's to pay me for the work?" Finkel asked laughingly.
    

      "Ah ... yes!" Vanda recollected, blushed and gave the dentist the rouble
      she had got for the turquoise ring.
    

      When she came into the street she felt still more ashamed than before, but
      she was not ashamed of her poverty any more. Nor did she notice any more
      that she hadn't an elaborate hat or a modish jacket. She walked along the
      street spitting blood and each red spittle told her about her life, a bad,
      hard life; about the insults she had suffered and had still to
      suffer-to-morrow, a week, a year hence—her whole life, till
      death....
    

      "Oh, how terrible it is!" she whispered. "My God, how terrible!"
    

      But the next day she was at the Renaissance and she danced there.
      She wore a new, immense red hat, a new jacket Ã  la mode and a pair
      of brown shoes. She was treated to supper by a young merchant from Kazan.
    





      This happened not so very long ago in the Moscow Circuit Court. The
      jurymen, left in court for the night, before going to bed, began a
      conversation about overwhelming sensations. It was occasioned by someone's
      recollection of a witness who became a stammerer and turned grey, owing,
      as he said, to one dreadful moment. The jurymen decided before going to
      bed that each one of them should dig into his memories and tell a story.
      Life is short; but still there is not a single man who can boast that he
      had not had some dreadful moments in his past.
    

      One juryman related how he was nearly drowned. A second told how one night
      he poisoned his own child, in a place where there was neither doctor nor
      chemist, by giving the child white copperas in mistake for soda. The child
      did not die, but the father nearly went mad. A third, not an old man, but
      sickly, described his two attempts to commit suicide. Once he shot
      himself; the second time he threw himself in front of a train.
    

      The fourth, a short, stout man, smartly dressed, told the following story:
    

      "I was no more than twenty-two or twenty-three years old, when I fell head
      over heels in love with my present wife and proposed to her. Now, I would
      gladly give myself a thrashing for that early marriage; but then—well,
      I don't know what would have happened to me if Natasha had refused. My
      love was most ardent, the kind described in novels as mad, passionate, and
      so on. My happiness choked me, and I did not know how to escape from it. I
      bored my father, my friends, the servants by continually telling them how
      desperately I was in love. Happy people are quite the most tiresome and
      boring. I used to be awfully exasperating. Even now I'm ashamed.
    

      "At the time I had a newly-called barrister among my friends. The
      barrister is now known all over Russia, but then he was only at the
      beginning of his popularity, and he was not rich or famous enough to have
      the right not to recognise a friend when he met him or not to raise his
      hat. I used to go and see him once or twice a week.
    

      "When I came, we used both to stretch ourselves upon the sofas and begin
      to philosophise.
    

      "Once I lay on the sofa, harping on the theme that there is no more
      ungrateful profession than a barrister's. I tried to show that after the
      witnesses have been heard the Court can easily dispense with the Crown
      Prosecutor and the barrister, because they are equally unnecessary and
      only hindrances. If an adult juryman, sound in spirit and mind, is
      convinced that this ceiling is white, or that Ivanov is guilty, no
      Demosthenes has the power to fight and overcome his conviction. Who can
      convince me that my moustache is carroty when I know it is black? When I
      listen to an orator I may perhaps get sentimental and even shed a tear,
      but my rooted convictions, for the most part based on the obvious and on
      facts, will not be changed an atom. My friend the barrister contended that
      I was still young and silly and was talking childish nonsense. In his
      opinion an obvious fact when illumined by conscientious experts became
      still more obvious. That was his first point. His second was that a talent
      is a force, an elemental power, a hurricane, that is able to turn even
      stones to dust, not to speak of such trifles as the convictions of
      householders and small shopkeepers. It is as hard for human frailty to
      struggle against a talent as it is to look at the sun without being
      blinded or to stop the wind. By the power of the word one single mortal
      converts thousands of convinced savages to Christianity. Ulysses was the
      most convinced person in the world, but he was all submission before the
      Syrens, and so on. All history is made up of such instances. In life we
      meet them at every turn. And so it ought to be; otherwise a clever person
      of talent would not be preferred before the stupid and untalented.
    

      "I persisted and continued to argue that a conviction is stronger than any
      talent, though, speaking frankly, I myself could not define what exactly
      is a conviction and what is a talent. Probably I talked only for the sake
      of talking.
    

      "'Take even your own case' ... said the barrister. 'You are convinced that
      your fiancÃ©e is an angel and that there's not a man in all the town
      happier than you. I tell you, ten or twenty minutes would be quite enough
      for me to make you sit down at this very table and write to break off the
      engagement.'
    

      "I began to laugh.
    

      "'Don't laugh. I'm talking seriously,' said my friend. 'If I only had the
      desire, in twenty minutes you would be happy in the thought that you have
      been saved from marriage. My talent is not great, but neither are you
      strong?'
    

      "'Well, try, please,' I said.
    

      "'No, why should I? I only said it in passing. You're a good boy. It would
      be a pity to expose you to such an experiment. Besides, I'm not in the
      mood, to-day.'
    

      "We sat down to supper. The wine and thoughts of Natasha and my love
      utterly filled me with a sense of youth and happiness. My happiness was so
      infinitely great that the green-eyed barrister opposite me seemed so
      unhappy, so little, so grey!"
    

      "'But do try,' I pressed him. 'I beg you.'
    

      "The barrister shook his head and knit his brows. Evidently I had begun to
      bore him.
    

      "'I know,' he said, 'that when the experiment is over you will thank me
      and call me saviour, but one must think of your sweetheart too. She loves
      you, and your refusal would make her suffer. But what a beauty she is 'I
      envy you.'
    

      "The barrister sighed, swallowed some wine, and began to speak of what a
      wonderful creature my Natasha was. He had an uncommon gift for
      description. He could pour out a whole heap of words about a woman's
      eyelashes or her little finger. I listened to him with delight.
    

      "'I've seen many women in my life-time;' he said, 'but I give you my word
      of honour, I tell you as a friend, your Natasha Andreevna is a gem, a rare
      girl! Of course, there are defects, even a good many, I grant you, but
      still she is charming.'
    

      "And the barrister began to speak of the defects of my sweetheart. Now I
      quite understand it was a general conversation about women, one about
      their weak points in general; but it appeared to me then as though he was
      speaking only of Natasha. He went into raptures about her snub-nose, her
      excited voice, her shrill laugh, her affectation—indeed, about
      everything I particularly disliked in her. All this was in his opinion
      infinitely amiable, gracious and feminine. Imperceptibly he changed from
      enthusiasm first to paternal edification, then to a light, sneering
      tone.... There was no Chairman of the Bench with us to stop the barrister
      riding the high horse. I hadn't a chance of opening my mouth—and
      what could I have said? My friend said nothing new, his truths were long
      familiar. The poison was not at all in what he said, but altogether in the
      devilish form in which he said it. A form of Satan's own invention! As I
      listened to him I was convinced that one and the same word had a thousand
      meanings and nuances according to the way it is pronounced and the turn
      given to the sentence. I certainly cannot reproduce the tone or the form.
      I can only say that as I listened to my friend and paced from corner to
      corner of my room, I was revolted, exasperated, contemptuous according as
      he felt. I even believed him when, with tears in his eyes, he declared to
      me that I was a great man, deserving a better fate, and destined in the
      future to accomplish some remarkable exploit, from which I might be
      prevented by my marriage.
    

      "'My dear friend,' he exclaimed, firmly grasping my hand, 'I implore you,
      I command you: stop before it is too late. Stop! God save you from this
      strange and terrible mistake! My friend, don't ruin your youth.'
    

      "Believe me or not as you will, but finally I sat down at the table and
      wrote to my sweetheart breaking off the engagement. I wrote and rejoiced
      that there was still time to repair my mistake. When the envelope was
      sealed I hurried into the street to put it in a pillar box. The barrister
      came with me.
    

      "'Splendid! Superb!' he praised me when my letter to Natasha disappeared
      into the darkness of the pillar-box. 'I congratulate you with all my
      heart. I'm delighted for your sake.'
    

      "After we had gone about ten steps together, the barrister continued:
    

      "'Of course, marriage has its bright side too. I, for instance, belong to
      the kind of men for whom marriage and family life are everything.'
    

      "He was already describing his life: all the ugliness of a lonely bachelor
      existence appeared before me.
    

      "He spoke with enthusiasm of his future wife, of the pleasures of an
      ordinary family life, and his transports were so beautiful and sincere
      that I was in absolute despair by the time we reached his door.
    

      "'What are you doing with me, you damnable man?' I said panting. 'You've
      ruined me! Why did you make me write that cursed letter? I love her! I
      love her!'
    

      "And I swore that I was in love. I was terrified of my action. It already
      seemed wild and absurd to me. Gentlemen, it is quite impossible to imagine
      a more overwhelming sensation than mine at that moment! If a kind man had
      happened to slip a revolver into my hand I would have put a bullet through
      my head gladly.
    

      "'Well, that's enough, enough!' the advocate said, patting my shoulder and
      beginning to laugh. 'Stop crying! The letter won't reach your sweetheart.
      It was I, not you, wrote the address on the envelope, and I muddled it up
      so that they won't be able to make anything of it at the post-office. But
      let this be a lesson to you. Don't discuss things you don't understand.'"
    

      "Now, gentlemen, next, please."
    

      The fifth juryman had settled himself comfortably and already opened his
      mouth to begin his story, when we heard the dock striking from Spaisky
      Church-tower.
    

      "Twelve...." one of the jurymen counted. "To which class, gentlemen, would
      you assign the sensations which our prisoner at the bar is now feeling?
      The murderer passes the night here in a prisoner's cell, either lying or
      sitting, certainly without sleeping and all through the sleepless night
      listens to the striking of the hours. What does he think of? What dreams
      visit him?"
    

      And all the jurymen suddenly forgot about overwhelming sensations. The
      experience of their friend, who once wrote the letter to his Natasha,
      seemed unimportant, and not even amusing. Nobody told any more stories;
      but they began to go to bed quietly, in silence.
    





      It is a great bore for an educated person not to know foreign languages.
      Vorotov felt it strongly, when on leaving the university after he had got
      his degree he occupied himself with a little scientific research.
    

      "It's awful!" he used to say, losing his breath (for although only
      twenty-six he was stout, heavy, and short of breath). "It's awful. Without
      knowing languages I'm like a bird without wings. I'll simply have to chuck
      the work."
    

      So he decided, come what might, to conquer his natural laziness and to
      study French and German, and he began to look out for a teacher.
    

      One winter afternoon, as Vorotov sat working in his study, the servant
      announced a lady to see him.
    

      "Show her in," said Vorotov.
    

      And a young lady, exquisitely dressed in the latest fashion, entered the
      study. She introduced herself as Alice Ossipovna Enquette, a teacher of
      French, and said that a friend of Vorotov's had sent her to him.
    

      "Very glad! Sit down!" said Vorotov, losing his breath, and clutching at
      the collar of his night shirt. (He always worked in a night shirt in order
      to breathe more easily.) "You were sent to me by Peter Sergueyevich?
      Yes.... Yes ... I asked him.... Very glad!"
    

      While he discussed the matter with Mademoiselle Enquette he glanced at her
      shyly, with curiosity. She was a genuine Frenchwoman, very elegant, and
      still quite young. From her pale and languid face, from her short, curly
      hair and unnaturally small waist, you would not think her more than
      eighteen, but looking at her broad, well-developed shoulders, her charming
      back and severe eyes, Vorotov decided that she was certainly not less than
      twenty-three, perhaps even twenty-five; but then again it seemed to him
      that she was only eighteen. Her face had the cold, business-like
      expression of one who had come to discuss a business matter. Never once
      did she smile or frown, and only once a look of perplexity flashed into
      her eyes, when she discovered that she was not asked to teach children but
      a grown up, stout young man.
    

      "So, Alice Ossipovna," Vorotov said to her, "you will give me a lesson
      daily from seven to eight o'clock in the evening. With regard to your wish
      to receive a rouble a lesson, I have no objection at all. A rouble—well,
      let it be a rouble...."
    

      And he went on asking her if she wanted tea or coffee, if the weather was
      fine, and, smiling good naturedly, stroking the tablecloth with the palm
      of his hand, he asked her kindly who she was, where she had completed her
      education, and how she earned her living.
    

      In a cold, business-like tone Alice Ossipovna answered that she had
      completed her education at a private school, and had then qualified as a
      domestic teacher, that her father had died recently of scarlet fever, her
      mother was alive and made artificial flowers, that she, Mademoiselle
      Enquette, gave private lessons at a pension in the morning, and from one
      o'clock right until the evening she taught in respectable private houses.
    

      She went, leaving a slight and almost imperceptible perfume of a woman's
      dress behind her. Vorotov did not work for a long time afterwards but sat
      at the table stroking the green cloth and thinking.
    

      "It's very pleasant to see girls earning their own living," he thought.
      "On the other hand it is very unpleasant to realise that poverty does not
      spare even such elegant and pretty girls as Alice Ossipovna; she, too,
      must struggle for her existence. Rotten luck!..."
    

      Having never seen virtuous Frenchwomen he also thought that this
      exquisitely dressed Alice Ossipovna, with her well-developed shoulders and
      unnaturally small waist was in all probability, engaged in something else
      besides teaching.
    

      Next evening when the clock pointed to five minutes to seven, Alice
      Ossipovna arrived, rosy from the cold; she opened Margot (an elementary
      text-book) and began without any preamble:
    

      "The French grammar has twenty-six letters. The first is called A, the
      second B...."
    

      "Pardon," interrupted Vorotov, smiling, "I must warn you, Mademoiselle,
      that you will have to change your methods somewhat in my case. The fact is
      that I know Russian, Latin and Greek very well. I have studied comparative
      philology, and it seems to me that we may leave out Margot and begin
      straight off to read some author." And he explained to the Frenchwoman how
      grown-up people study languages.
    

      "A friend of mine," said he, "who wished to know modern languages put a
      French, German and Latin gospel in front of him and then minutely analysed
      one word after another. The result—he achieved his purpose in less
      than a year. Let us take some author and start reading."
    

      The Frenchwoman gave him a puzzled look. It was evident that Vorotov's
      proposal appeared to her naive and absurd. If he had not been grown up she
      would certainly have got angry and stormed at him, but as he was a very
      stout, adult man at whom she could not storm, she only shrugged her
      shoulders half-perceptibly and said:
    

      "Just as you please."
    

      Vorotov ransacked his bookshelves and produced a ragged French book.
    

      "Will this do?" he asked.
    

      "It's all the same."
    

      "In that case let us begin. Let us start from the title, MÃ©moires."
    

      "Reminiscences...." translated Mademoiselle Enquette.
    

      "Reminiscences...." repeated Vorotov.
    

      Smiling good naturedly and breathing heavily, he passed a quarter of an
      hour over the word mÃ©moires and the same with the word de.
      This tired Alice Ossipovna out. She answered his questions carelessly, got
      confused and evidently neither understood her pupil nor tried to. Vorotov
      asked her questions, and at the same time glanced furtively at her fair
      hair, thinking:
    

      "The hair is not naturally curly. She waves it. Marvellous! She works from
      morning till night and yet she finds time to wave her hair."
    

      At eight o'clock sharp she got up, gave him a dry, cold "Au revoir,
      Monsieur," and left the study. After her lingered the same sweet, subtle,
      agitating perfume. The pupil again did nothing for a long time, but sat by
      the table and thought.
    

      During the following days he became convinced that his teacher was a
      charming girl serious and punctual, but very uneducated and incapable of
      teaching grown up people; so he decided he would not waste his time, but
      part with her and engage someone else. When she came for the seventh
      lesson he took an envelope containing seven roubles out of his pocket.
      Holding it in his hands and blushing furiously, he began:
    

      "I am sorry, Alice Ossipovna, but I must tell you.... I am placed in an
      awkward position...."
    

      The Frenchwoman glanced at the envelope and guessed what was the matter.
      For the first time during the lessons a shiver passed over her face and
      the cold, business-like expression disappeared. She reddened faintly, and
      casting her eyes down, began to play absently with her thin gold chain.
      And Vorotov, noticing her confusion, understood how precious this rouble
      was to her, how hard it would be for her to lose this money.
    

      "I must tell you," he murmured, getting still more confused. His heart
      gave a thump. Quickly he put the envelope back into his pocket and
      continued:
    

      "Excuse me. I ... I will leave you for ten minutes...."
    

      And as though he did not want to dismiss her at all, but had only asked
      permission to retire for a moment he went into another room and sat there
      for ten minutes. Then he returned, more confused than ever; he thought
      that his leaving her like that would be explained by her in a certain way
      and this made him awkward.
    

      The lessons began again.
    

      Vorotov wanted them no more. Knowing that they would lead to nothing he
      gave the Frenchwoman a free hand; he did not question or interrupt her any
      more. She translated at her own sweet will, ten pages a lesson, but he did
      not listen. He breathed heavily and for want of occupation gazed now and
      then at her curly little head, her neck, her soft white hands, and inhaled
      the perfume of her dress.
    

      He caught himself thinking about her as he ought not and it shamed him, or
      admiring her, and then he felt aggrieved and angry because she behaved so
      coldly towards him, in such a businesslike way, never smiling and as if
      afraid that he might suddenly touch her. All the while he thought: How
      could he inspire her with confidence in him, how could he get to know her
      better, to help her, to make her realise how badly she taught, poor little
      soul?
    

      Once Alice Ossipovna came to the lesson in a dainty pink dress, a little
      dÃ©colletÃ©, and such a sweet scent came from her that you might have
      thought she was wrapped in a cloud, that you had only to blow on her for
      her to fly away or dissolve like smoke. She apologised, saying she could
      only stay for half an hour, because she had to go straight from the lesson
      to a ball.
    

      He gazed at her neck, at her bare shoulders and he thought he understood
      why Frenchwomen were known to be light-minded and easily won; he was
      drowned in this cloud of scent, beauty, and nudity, and she, quite unaware
      of his thoughts and probably not in the least interested in them, read
      over the pages quickly and translated full steam ahead:
    

      "He walked over the street and met the gentleman of his friend and said:
      where do you rush? seeing your face so pale it makes me pain."
    

      The MÃ©moires had been finished long ago; Alice was now translating
      another book. Once she came to the lesson an hour earlier, apologising
      because she had to go to the Little Theatre at seven o'clock. When the
      lesson was over Vorotov dressed and he too went to the theatre. It seemed
      to him only for the sake of rest and distraction, and he did not even
      think of Alice. He would not admit that a serious man, preparing for a
      scientific career, a stay-at-home, should brush aside his book and rush to
      the theatre for the sake of meeting an unintellectual, stupid girl whom he
      hardly knew.
    

      But somehow, dining the intervals his heart beat, and, without noticing
      it, he ran about the foyer and the corridors like a boy, looking
      impatiently for someone. Every time the interval was over he was tired,
      but when he discovered the familiar pink dress and the lovely shoulders
      veiled with tulle his heart jumped as if from a presentiment of happiness,
      he smiled joyfully, and for the first time in his life he felt jealous.
    

      Alice was with two ugly students and an officer. She was laughing, talking
      loudly and evidently flirting. Vorotov had never seen her like that.
      Apparently she was happy, contented, natural, warm. Why? What was the
      reason? Perhaps because these people were dear to her and belonged to the
      same class as she. Vorotov felt the huge abyss between him and that class.
      He bowed to his teacher, but she nodded coldly and quietly passed by. It
      was plain she did not want her cavaliers to know that she had pupils and
      gave lessons because she was poor.
    

      After the meeting at the theatre Vorotov knew that he was in love. During
      lessons that followed he devoured his elegant teacher with his eyes, and
      no longer struggling, he gave full rein to his pure and impure thoughts.
      Alice's face was always cold. Exactly at eight o'clock every evening she
      said calmly, "Au revoir, Monsieur," and he felt that she was indifferent
      to him and would remain indifferent, that—his position was hopeless.
    

      Sometimes in the middle of a lesson he would begin dreaming, hoping,
      building plans; he composed an amorous declaration, remembering that
      Frenchwomen were frivolous and complaisant, but he had only to give his
      teacher one glance for his thoughts to be blown out like a candle, when
      you carry it on to the verandah of a bungalow and the wind is blowing.
      Once, overcome, forgetting everything, in a frenzy, he could stand it no
      longer. He barred her way when she came from the study into the hall after
      the lesson and, losing his breath and stammering, began to declare his
      love:
    

      "You are dear to me!... I love you. Please let me speak!"
    

      Alice grew pale: probably she was afraid that after this declaration she
      would not be able to come to him any more and receive a rouble a lesson.
      She looked at him with terrified eyes and began in a loud whisper:
    

      "Ah, it's impossible! Do not speak, I beg you! Impossible!"
    

      Afterwards Vorotov did not sleep all night; he tortured himself with
      shame, abused himself, thinking feverishly. He thought that his
      declaration had offended the girl and that she would not come any more. He
      made up his mind to find out where she lived from the Address Bureau and
      to write her an apology. But Alice came without the letter. For a moment
      she felt awkward, and then opened the book and began to translate quickly,
      in an animated voice, as always:
    

      "'Oh, young gentleman, do not rend these flowers in my garden which I want
      to give to my sick daughter.'"
    

      She still goes. Four books have been translated by now but Vorotov knows
      nothing beyond the word mÃ©moires, and when he is asked about his
      scientific research work he waves his hand, leaves the question
      unanswered, and begins to talk about the weather.
    





      State-Councillor Sharamykin's drawing-room is wrapped in a pleasant
      half-darkness. The big bronze lamp with the green shade, makes the walls,
      the furniture, the faces, all green, couleur "Nuit d'Ukraine"
      Occasionally a smouldering log flares up in the dying fire and for a
      moment casts a red glow over the faces; but this does not spoil the
      general harmony of light. The general tone, as the painters say, is well
      sustained.
    

      Sharamykin sits in a chair in front of the fireplace, in the attitude of a
      man who has just dined. He is an elderly man with a high official's grey
      side whiskers and meek blue eyes. Tenderness is shed over his face, and
      his lips are set in a melancholy smile. At his feet, stretched out lazily,
      with his legs towards the fire-place, Vice-Governor Lopniev sits on a
      little stool. He is a brave-looking man of about forty. Sharamykin's
      children are moving about round the piano; Nina, Kolya, Nadya, and Vanya.
      The door leading to Madame Sharamykin's room is slightly open and the
      light breaks through timidly. There behind the door sits Sharamykin's
      wife, Anna Pavlovna, in front of her writing-table. She is president of
      the local ladies' committee, a lively, piquant lady of thirty years and a
      little bit over. Through her pince-nez her vivacious black eyes are
      running over the pages of a French novel. Beneath the novel lies a
      tattered copy of the report of the committee for last year.
    

      "Formerly our town was much better off in these things," says Sharamykin,
      screwing up his meek eyes at the glowing coals. "Never a winter passed but
      some star would pay us a visit. Famous actors and singers used to come ...
      but now, besides acrobats and organ-grinders, the devil only knows what
      comes. There's no aesthetic pleasure at all.... We might be living in a
      forest. Yes.... And does your Excellency remember that Italian
      tragedian?... What's his name?... He was so dark, and tall.... Let me
      think.... Oh, yes! Luigi Ernesto di Ruggiero.... Remarkable talent.... And
      strength. He had only to say one word and the whole theatre was on the qui
      vive. My darling Anna used to take a great interest in his talent. She
      hired the theatre for him and sold tickets for the performances in
      advance.... In return he taught her elocution and gesture. A first-rate
      fellow! He came here ... to be quite exact ... twelve years ago.... No,
      that's not true.... Less, ten years.... Anna dear, how old is our Nina?"
    

      "She'll be ten next birthday," calls Anna Pavlovna from her room. "Why?"
    

      "Nothing in particular, my dear. I was just curious.... And good singers
      used to come. Do you remember Prilipchin, the tenore di grazia?
      What a charming fellow he was! How good looking! Fair ... a very
      expressive face, Parisian manners.... And what a voice, your Excellency!
      Only one weakness: he would sing some notes with his stomach and would
      take re falsetto—otherwise everything was good. Tamberlik, he
      said, had taught him.... My dear Anna and I hired a hall for him at the
      Social Club, and in gratitude for that he used to sing to us for whole
      days and nights.... He taught dear Anna to sing. He came—I remember
      it as though it were last night—in Lent, some twelve years ago. No,
      it's more.... How bad my memory is getting, Heaven help me! Anna dear, how
      old is our darling Nadya?
    

      "Twelve."
    

      "Twelve ... then we've got to add ten months.... That makes it exact ...
      thirteen. Somehow there used to be more life in our town then.... Take,
      for instance, the charity soirÃ©es. What enjoyable soirÃ©es we used to have
      before! How elegant! There were singing, playing, and recitation.... After
      the war, I remember, when the Turkish prisoners were here, dear Anna
      arranged a soiree on behalf of the wounded. We collected eleven hundred
      roubles. I remember the Turkish officers were passionately fond of dear
      Anna's voice, and kissed her hand incessantly. He-he! Asiatics, but a
      grateful nation. Would you believe me, the soiree was such a success that
      I wrote an account of it in my diary? It was,—I remember it as
      though it had only just happened,—in '76,... no, in '77.... No!
      Pray, when were the Turks here? Anna dear, how old is our little Kolya?"
    

      "I'm seven, Papa!" says Kolya, a brat with a swarthy face and coal black
      hair.
    

      "Yes, we're old, and we've lost the energy we used to have," Lopniev
      agreed with a sigh. "That's the real cause. Old age, my friend. No new
      moving spirits arrive, and the old ones grow old.... The old fire is dull
      now. When I was younger I did not like company to be bored.... I was your
      Anna Pavlovna's first assistant. Whether it was a charity soirÃ©e or a
      tombola to support a star who was going to arrive, whatever Anna Pavlovna
      was arranging, I used to throw over everything and begin to bustle about.
      One winter, I remember, I bustled and ran so much that I even got ill....
      I shan't forget that winter.... Do you remember what a performance we
      arranged with Anna Pavlovna in aid of the victims of the fire?"
    

      "What year was it?"
    

      "Not so very long ago.... In '79. No, in '80, I believe! Tell me how old
      is your Vanya?"
    

      "Five," Anna Pavlovna calls from the study.
    

      "Well, that means it was six years ago. Yes, my dear friend, that was a
      time. It's all over now. The old fire's quite gone."
    

      Lopniev and Sharamykin grew thoughtful. The smouldering log flares up for
      the last time, and then is covered in ash.
    





      State-Councillor Usielkov, architect, arrived in his native town, where he
      had been summoned to restore the cemetery church. He was born in the town,
      he had grown up and been married there, and yet when he got out of the
      train he hardly recognised it. Everything was changed. For instance,
      eighteen years ago, when he left the town to settle in Petersburg, where
      the railway station is now boys used to hunt for marmots: now as you come
      into the High Street there is a four storied "Hotel Vienna," with
      apartments, where there was of old an ugly grey fence. But not the fence
      or the houses, or anything had changed so much as the people. Questioning
      the hall-porter, Usielkov discovered that more than half of the people he
      remembered were dead or paupers or forgotten.
    

      "Do you remember Usielkov?" he asked the porter. "Usielkov, the architect,
      who divorced his wife.... He had a house in Sviribev Street.... Surely you
      remember."
    

      "No, I don't remember anyone of the name."
    

      "Why, it's impossible not to remember. It was an exciting case. All the
      cabmen knew, even. Try to remember. His divorce was managed by the
      attorney, Shapkin, the swindler ... the notorious sharper, the man who was
      thrashed at the dub...."
    

      "You mean Ivan Nicolaich?"
    

      "Yes.... Is he alive? dead?"
    

      "Thank heaven, his honour's alive. His honour's a notary now, with an
      office. Well-to-do. Two houses in Kirpichny Street. Just lately married
      his daughter off."
    

      Usielkov strode from one corner of the room to another. An idea flashed
      into his mind. From boredom, he decided to see Shapkin. It was afternoon
      when he left the hotel and quietly walked to Kirpichny Street. He found
      Shapkin in his office and hardly recognised him. From the well-built,
      alert attorney with a quick, impudent, perpetually tipsy expression,
      Shapkin had become a modest, grey-haired, shrunken old man.
    

      "You don't recognise me.... You have forgotten ...." Usielkov began. "I'm
      your old client, Usielkov."
    

      "Usielkov? Which Usielkov? Ah!" Remembrance came to Shapkin: he recognised
      him and was confused. Began exclamations, questions, recollections.
    

      "Never expected ... never thought...." chuckled Shapkin. "What will you
      have? Would you like champagne? Perhaps you'd like oysters. My dear man,
      what a lot of money I got out of you in the old days—so much that I
      can't think what I ought to stand you."
    

      "Please don't trouble," said Usielkov. "I haven't time. I must go to the
      cemetery and examine the church. I have a commission."
    

      "Splendid. We'll have something to eat and a drink and go together. I've
      got some splendid horses! I'll take you there and introduce you to the
      churchwarden.... I'll fix up everything.... But what's the matter, my
      dearest man? You're not avoiding me, not afraid? Please sit nearer.
      There's nothing to be afraid of now.... Long ago, I really was pretty
      sharp, a bit of a rogue ... but now I'm quieter than water, humbler than
      grass. I've grown old; got a family. There are children.... Time to die!"
    

      The friends had something to eat and drink, and went in a coach and pair
      to the cemetery.
    

      "Yes, it was a good time," Shapkin was reminiscent, sitting in the sledge.
      "I remember, but I simply can't believe it. Do you remember how you
      divorced your wife? It's almost twenty years ago, and you've probably
      forgotten everything, but I remember it as though I conducted the petition
      yesterday. My God, how rotten I was! Then I was a smart, casuistical
      devil, full of sharp practice and devilry.... and I used to run into some
      shady affairs, particularly when there was a good fee, as in your case,
      for instance. What was it you paid me then? Five—six hundred. Enough
      to upset anybody! By the time you left for Petersburg you'd left the whole
      affair completely in my hands. 'Do what you like!' And your former wife,
      Sophia Mikhailovna, though she did come from a merchant family, was proud
      and selfish. To bribe her to take the guilt on herself was difficult—extremely
      difficult. I used to come to her for a business talk, and when she saw me,
      she would say to her maid: 'Masha, surely I told you I wasn't at home to
      scoundrels.' I tried one way, then another ... wrote letters to her, tried
      to meet her accidentally—no good. I had to work through a third
      person. For a long time I had trouble with her, and she only yielded when
      you agreed to give her ten thousand. She could not stand out against ten
      thousand. She succumbed.... She began to weep, spat in my face, but she
      yielded and took the guilt on herself."
    

      "If I remember it was fifteen, not ten thousand she took from me," said
      Usielkov.
    

      "Yes, of course ... fifteen, my mistake." Shapkin was disconcerted.
      "Anyway it's all past and done with now. Why shouldn't I confess, frankly?
      Ten I gave to her, and the remaining five I bargained out of you for my
      own share. I deceived both of you.... It's all past, why be ashamed of it?
      And who else was there to take from, Boris Pietrovich, if not from you? I
      ask you.... You were rich and well-to-do. You married in caprice: you were
      divorced in caprice. You were making a fortune. I remember you got twenty
      thousand out of a single contract. Whom was I to tap, if not you? And I
      must confess, I was tortured by envy. If you got hold of a nice lot of
      money, people would take off their hats to you: but the same people would
      beat me for shillings and smack my face in the club. But why recall it?
      It's time to forget."
    

      "Tell me, please, how did Sophia Mikhailovna live afterwards?"
    

      "With her ten thousand? On ne peut plus badly.... God knows whether
      it was frenzy or pride and conscience that tortured her, because she had
      sold herself for money—or perhaps she loved you; but, she took to
      drink, you know. She received the money and began to gad about with
      officers in troikas.... Drunkenness, philandering, debauchery.... She
      would come into a tavern with an officer, and instead of port or a light
      wine, she would drink the strongest cognac to drive her into a frenzy."
    

      "Yes, she was eccentric. I suffered enough with her. She would take
      offence at some trifle and then get nervous.... And what happened
      afterwards?"
    

      "A week passed, a fortnight.... I was sitting at home writing. Suddenly,
      the door opened and she comes in. 'Take your cursed money,' she said, and
      threw the parcel in my face.... She could not resist it.... Five hundred
      were missing. She had only got rid of five hundred."
    

      "And what did you do with the money?"
    

      "It's all past and done with. What's the good of concealing it?... I
      certainly took it. What are you staring at me like that for? Wait for the
      sequel. It's a complete novel, the sickness of a soul! Two months passed
      by. One night I came home drunk, in a wicked mood.... I turned on the
      light and saw Sophia Mikhailovna sitting on my sofa, drunk too, wandering
      a bit, with something savage in her face as if she had just escaped from
      the mad-house. 'Give me my money back,' she said. 'I've changed my mind.
      If I'm going to the dogs, I want to go madly, passionately. Make haste,
      you scoundrel, give me the money.' How indecent it was!"
    

      "And you ... did you give it her?"
    

      "I remember I gave her ten roubles."
    

      "Oh ... is it possible?" Usielkov frowned. "If you couldn't do it
      yourself, or you didn't want to, you could have written to me.... And I
      didn't know ... I didn't know."
    

      "My dear man, why should I write, when she wrote herself afterwards when
      she was in hospital?"
    

      "I was so taken up with the new marriage that I paid no attention to
      letters.... But you were an outsider; you had no antagonism to Sophia
      Mikhailovna.... Why didn't you help her?"
    

      "We can't judge by our present standards, Boris Pietrovich. Now we think
      in this way; but then we thought quite differently.... Now I might perhaps
      give her a thousand roubles; but then even ten roubles ... she didn't get
      them for nothing. It's a terrible story. It's time to forget.... But here
      you are!"
    

      The sledge stopped at the churchyard gate. Usielkov and Shapkin got out of
      the sledge, went through the gate and walked along a long, broad avenue.
      The bare cherry trees, the acacias, the grey crosses and monuments
      sparkled with hoar-frost. In each flake of snow the bright sunny day was
      reflected. There was the smell you find in all cemeteries of incense and
      fresh-dug earth.
    

      "You have a beautiful cemetery," said Usielkov. "It's almost an orchard."
    

      "Yes, but it's a pity the thieves steal the monuments. Look, there, behind
      that cast-iron memorial, on the right, Sophia Mikhailovna is buried. Would
      you like to see?"
    

      The friends turned to the right, stepping in deep snow towards the
      cast-iron memorial.
    

      "Down here," said Shapkin, pointing to a little stone of white marble.
      "Some subaltern or other put up the monument on her grave." Usielkov
      slowly took off his hat and showed his bald pate to the snow. Eying him,
      Shapkin also took off his hat, and another baldness shone beneath the sun.
      The silence round about was like the tomb, as though the air were dead,
      too. The friends looked at the stone, silent, thinking.
    

      "She is asleep!" Shapkin broke the silence. "And she cares very little
      that she took the guilt upon herself and drank cognac. Confess, Boris
      Pietrovich!"
    

      "What?" asked Usielkov, sternly.
    

      "That, however loathsome the past may be, it's better than this." And
      Shapkin pointed to his grey hairs.
    

      "In the old days I did not even think of death.... If I'd met her, I would
      have circumvented her, but now ... well, now!"
    

      Sadness took hold of Usielkov. Suddenly he wanted to cry, passionately, as
      he once desired to love.... And he felt that these tears would be
      exquisite, refreshing. Moisture came out of his eyes and a lump rose in
      his throat, but.... Shapkin was standing by his side, and Usielkov felt
      ashamed of his weakness before a witness. He turned back quickly and
      walked towards the church.
    

      Two hours later, having arranged with the churchwarden and examined the
      church, he seized the opportunity while Shapkin was talking away to the
      priest, and ran to shed a tear. He walked to the stone surreptitiously,
      with stealthy steps, looking round all the time. The little white monument
      stared at him absently, so sadly and innocently, as though a girl and not
      a wanton divorcÃ©e were beneath.
    

      "If I could weep, could weep!" thought Usielkov.
    

      But the moment for weeping had been lost. Though the old man managed to
      make his eyes shine, and tried to bring himself to the right pitch, the
      tears did not flow and the lump did not rise in his throat.... After
      waiting for about ten minutes, Usielkov waved his arm and went to look for
+      Shapkin.
    



The Darling and Other Stories





THE DARLING


OLENKA, the daughter of the retired collegiate assessor, Plemyanniakov,
was sitting in her back porch, lost in thought. It was hot, the
flies were persistent and teasing, and it was pleasant to reflect
that it would soon be evening. Dark rainclouds were gathering from
the east, and bringing from time to time a breath of moisture in
the air.


Kukin, who was the manager of an open-air theatre called the Tivoli,
and who lived in the lodge, was standing in the middle of the garden
looking at the sky.


"Again!" he observed despairingly. "It's going to rain again! Rain
every day, as though to spite me. I might as well hang myself! It's
ruin! Fearful losses every day."


He flung up his hands, and went on, addressing Olenka:


"There! that's the life we lead, Olga Semyonovna. It's enough to
make one cry. One works and does one's utmost, one wears oneself
out, getting no sleep at night, and racks one's brain what to do
for the best. And then what happens? To begin with, one's public
is ignorant, boorish. I give them the very best operetta, a dainty
masque, first rate music-hall artists. But do you suppose that's
what they want! They don't understand anything of that sort. They
want a clown; what they ask for is vulgarity. And then look at the
weather! Almost every evening it rains. It started on the tenth of
May, and it's kept it up all May and June. It's simply awful! The
public doesn't come, but I've to pay the rent just the same, and
pay the artists."


The next evening the clouds would gather again, and Kukin would say
with an hysterical laugh:


"Well, rain away, then! Flood the garden, drown me! Damn my luck
in this world and the next! Let the artists have me up! Send me to
prison!--to Siberia!--the scaffold! Ha, ha, ha!"


And next day the same thing.


Olenka listened to Kukin with silent gravity, and sometimes tears
came into her eyes. In the end his misfortunes touched her; she
grew to love him. He was a small thin man, with a yellow face, and
curls combed forward on his forehead. He spoke in a thin tenor; as
he talked his mouth worked on one side, and there was always an
expression of despair on his face; yet he aroused a deep and genuine
affection in her. She was always fond of some one, and could not
exist without loving. In earlier days she had loved her papa, who
now sat in a darkened room, breathing with difficulty; she had loved
her aunt who used to come every other year from Bryansk; and before
that, when she was at school, she had loved her French master. She
was a gentle, soft-hearted, compassionate girl, with mild, tender
eyes and very good health. At the sight of her full rosy cheeks,
her soft white neck with a little dark mole on it, and the kind,
naÃ¯ve smile, which came into her face when she listened to anything
pleasant, men thought, "Yes, not half bad," and smiled too, while
lady visitors could not refrain from seizing her hand in the middle
of a conversation, exclaiming in a gush of delight, "You darling!"


The house in which she had lived from her birth upwards, and which
was left her in her father's will, was at the extreme end of the
town, not far from the Tivoli. In the evenings and at night she
could head the band playing, and the crackling and banging of
fireworks, and it seemed to her that it was Kukin struggling with
his destiny, storming the entrenchments of his chief foe, the
indifferent public; there was a sweet thrill at her heart, she had
no desire to sleep, and when he returned home at day-break, she
tapped softly at her bedroom window, and showing him only her face
and one shoulder through the curtain, she gave him a friendly
smile. . . .


He proposed to her, and they were married. And when he had a closer
view of her neck and her plump, fine shoulders, he threw up his
hands, and said:


"You darling!"


He was happy, but as it rained on the day and night of his wedding,
his face still retained an expression of despair.


They got on very well together. She used to sit in his office, to
look after things in the Tivoli, to put down the accounts and pay
the wages. And her rosy cheeks, her sweet, naÃ¯ve, radiant smile,
were to be seen now at the office window, now in the refreshment
bar or behind the scenes of the theatre. And already she used to
say to her acquaintances that the theatre was the chief and most
important thing in life and that it was only through the drama that
one could derive true enjoyment and become cultivated and humane.


"But do you suppose the public understands that?" she used to say.
"What they want is a clown. Yesterday we gave 'Faust Inside Out,'
and almost all the boxes were empty; but if Vanitchka and I had
been producing some vulgar thing, I assure you the theatre would
have been packed. Tomorrow Vanitchka and I are doing 'Orpheus in
Hell.' Do come."


And what Kukin said about the theatre and the actors she repeated.
Like him she despised the public for their ignorance and their
indifference to art; she took part in the rehearsals, she corrected
the actors, she kept an eye on the behaviour of the musicians, and
when there was an unfavourable notice in the local paper, she shed
tears, and then went to the editor's office to set things right.


The actors were fond of her and used to call her "Vanitchka and I,"
and "the darling"; she was sorry for them and used to lend them
small sums of money, and if they deceived her, she used to shed a
few tears in private, but did not complain to her husband.


They got on well in the winter too. They took the theatre in the
town for the whole winter, and let it for short terms to a Little
Russian company, or to a conjurer, or to a local dramatic society.
Olenka grew stouter, and was always beaming with satisfaction, while
Kukin grew thinner and yellower, and continually complained of their
terrible losses, although he had not done badly all the winter. He
used to cough at night, and she used to give him hot raspberry tea
or lime-flower water, to rub him with eau-de-Cologne and to wrap
him in her warm shawls.


"You're such a sweet pet!" she used to say with perfect sincerity,
stroking his hair. "You're such a pretty dear!"


Towards Lent he went to Moscow to collect a new troupe, and without
him she could not sleep, but sat all night at her window, looking
at the stars, and she compared herself with the hens, who are awake
all night and uneasy when the cock is not in the hen-house. Kukin
was detained in Moscow, and wrote that he would be back at Easter,
adding some instructions about the Tivoli. But on the Sunday before
Easter, late in the evening, came a sudden ominous knock at the
gate; some one was hammering on the gate as though on a barrel--
boom, boom, boom! The drowsy cook went flopping with her bare feet
through the puddles, as she ran to open the gate.


"Please open," said some one outside in a thick bass. "There is a
telegram for you."


Olenka had received telegrams from her husband before, but this
time for some reason she felt numb with terror. With shaking hands
she opened the telegram and read as follows:


"IVAN PETROVITCH DIED SUDDENLY TO-DAY. AWAITING IMMATE INSTRUCTIONS
FUFUNERAL TUESDAY."


That was how it was written in the telegram--"fufuneral," and the
utterly incomprehensible word "immate." It was signed by the stage
manager of the operatic company.


"My darling!" sobbed Olenka. "Vanka, my precious, my darling! Why
did I ever meet you! Why did I know you and love you! Your poor
heart-broken Olenka is alone without you!"


Kukin's funeral took place on Tuesday in Moscow, Olenka returned
home on Wednesday, and as soon as she got indoors, she threw herself
on her bed and sobbed so loudly that it could be heard next door,
and in the street.


"Poor darling!" the neighbours said, as they crossed themselves.
"Olga Semyonovna, poor darling! How she does take on!"


Three months later Olenka was coming home from mass, melancholy and
in deep mourning. It happened that one of her neighbours, Vassily
Andreitch Pustovalov, returning home from church, walked back beside
her. He was the manager at Babakayev's, the timber merchant's. He
wore a straw hat, a white waistcoat, and a gold watch-chain, and
looked more a country gentleman than a man in trade.


"Everything happens as it is ordained, Olga Semyonovna," he said
gravely, with a sympathetic note in his voice; "and if any of our
dear ones die, it must be because it is the will of God, so we ought
have fortitude and bear it submissively."


After seeing Olenka to her gate, he said good-bye and went on. All
day afterwards she heard his sedately dignified voice, and whenever
she shut her eyes she saw his dark beard. She liked him very much.
And apparently she had made an impression on him too, for not long
afterwards an elderly lady, with whom she was only slightly acquainted,
came to drink coffee with her, and as soon as she was seated at
table began to talk about Pustovalov, saying that he was an excellent
man whom one could thoroughly depend upon, and that any girl would
be glad to marry him. Three days later Pustovalov came himself. He
did not stay long, only about ten minutes, and he did not say much,
but when he left, Olenka loved him--loved him so much that she
lay awake all night in a perfect fever, and in the morning she sent
for the elderly lady. The match was quickly arranged, and then came
the wedding.


Pustovalov and Olenka got on very well together when they were
married.


Usually he sat in the office till dinner-time, then he went out on
business, while Olenka took his place, and sat in the office till
evening, making up accounts and booking orders.


"Timber gets dearer every year; the price rises twenty per cent,"
she would say to her customers and friends. "Only fancy we used to
sell local timber, and now Vassitchka always has to go for wood to
the Mogilev district. And the freight!" she would add, covering her
cheeks with her hands in horror. "The freight!"


It seemed to her that she had been in the timber trade for ages and
ages, and that the most important and necessary thing in life was
timber; and there was something intimate and touching to her in the
very sound of words such as "baulk," "post," "beam," "pole,"
"scantling," "batten," "lath," "plank," etc.


At night when she was asleep she dreamed of perfect mountains of
planks and boards, and long strings of wagons, carting timber
somewhere far away. She dreamed that a whole regiment of six-inch
beams forty feet high, standing on end, was marching upon the
timber-yard; that logs, beams, and boards knocked together with the
resounding crash of dry wood, kept falling and getting up again,
piling themselves on each other. Olenka cried out in her sleep, and
Pustovalov said to her tenderly: "Olenka, what's the matter, darling?
Cross yourself!"


Her husband's ideas were hers. If he thought the room was too hot,
or that business was slack, she thought the same. Her husband did
not care for entertainments, and on holidays he stayed at home. She
did likewise.


"You are always at home or in the office," her friends said to her.
"You should go to the theatre, darling, or to the circus."


"Vassitchka and I have no time to go to theatres," she would answer
sedately. "We have no time for nonsense. What's the use of these
theatres?"


On Saturdays Pustovalov and she used to go to the evening service;
on holidays to early mass, and they walked side by side with softened
faces as they came home from church. There was a pleasant fragrance
about them both, and her silk dress rustled agreeably. At home they
drank tea, with fancy bread and jams of various kinds, and afterwards
they ate pie. Every day at twelve o'clock there was a savoury smell
of beet-root soup and of mutton or duck in their yard, and on
fast-days of fish, and no one could pass the gate without feeling
hungry. In the office the samovar was always boiling, and customers
were regaled with tea and cracknels. Once a week the couple went
to the baths and returned side by side, both red in the face.


"Yes, we have nothing to complain of, thank God," Olenka used to
say to her acquaintances. "I wish every one were as well off as
Vassitchka and I."


When Pustovalov went away to buy wood in the Mogilev district, she
missed him dreadfully, lay awake and cried. A young veterinary
surgeon in the army, called Smirnin, to whom they had let their
lodge, used sometimes to come in in the evening. He used to talk
to her and play cards with her, and this entertained her in her
husband's absence. She was particularly interested in what he told
her of his home life. He was married and had a little boy, but was
separated from his wife because she had been unfaithful to him, and
now he hated her and used to send her forty roubles a month for the
maintenance of their son. And hearing of all this, Olenka sighed
and shook her head. She was sorry for him.


"Well, God keep you," she used to say to him at parting, as she
lighted him down the stairs with a candle. "Thank you for coming
to cheer me up, and may the Mother of God give you health."


And she always expressed herself with the same sedateness and
dignity, the same reasonableness, in imitation of her husband. As
the veterinary surgeon was disappearing behind the door below, she
would say:


"You know, Vladimir Platonitch, you'd better make it up with your
wife. You should forgive her for the sake of your son. You may be
sure the little fellow understands."


And when Pustovalov came back, she told him in a low voice about
the veterinary surgeon and his unhappy home life, and both sighed
and shook their heads and talked about the boy, who, no doubt,
missed his father, and by some strange connection of ideas, they
went up to the holy ikons, bowed to the ground before them and
prayed that God would give them children.


And so the Pustovalovs lived for six years quietly and peaceably
in love and complete harmony.


But behold! one winter day after drinking hot tea in the office,
Vassily Andreitch went out into the yard without his cap on to see
about sending off some timber, caught cold and was taken ill. He
had the best doctors, but he grew worse and died after four months'
illness. And Olenka was a widow once more.


"I've nobody, now you've left me, my darling," she sobbed, after
her husband's funeral. "How can I live without you, in wretchedness
and misery! Pity me, good people, all alone in the world!"


She went about dressed in black with long "weepers," and gave up
wearing hat and gloves for good. She hardly ever went out, except
to church, or to her husband's grave, and led the life of a nun.
It was not till six months later that she took off the weepers and
opened the shutters of the windows. She was sometimes seen in the
mornings, going with her cook to market for provisions, but what
went on in her house and how she lived now could only be surmised.
People guessed, from seeing her drinking tea in her garden with the
veterinary surgeon, who read the newspaper aloud to her, and from
the fact that, meeting a lady she knew at the post-office, she said
to her:


"There is no proper veterinary inspection in our town, and that's
the cause of all sorts of epidemics. One is always hearing of
people's getting infection from the milk supply, or catching diseases
from horses and cows. The health of domestic animals ought to be
as well cared for as the health of human beings."


She repeated the veterinary surgeon's words, and was of the same
opinion as he about everything. It was evident that she could not
live a year without some attachment, and had found new happiness
in the lodge. In any one else this would have been censured, but
no one could think ill of Olenka; everything she did was so natural.
Neither she nor the veterinary surgeon said anything to other people
of the change in their relations, and tried, indeed, to conceal it,
but without success, for Olenka could not keep a secret. When he
had visitors, men serving in his regiment, and she poured out tea
or served the supper, she would begin talking of the cattle plague,
of the foot and mouth disease, and of the municipal slaughterhouses.
He was dreadfully embarrassed, and when the guests had gone, he
would seize her by the hand and hiss angrily:


"I've asked you before not to talk about what you don't understand.
When we veterinary surgeons are talking among ourselves, please
don't put your word in. It's really annoying."


And she would look at him with astonishment and dismay, and ask him
in alarm: "But, Voloditchka, what _am_ I to talk about?"


And with tears in her eyes she would embrace him, begging him not
to be angry, and they were both happy.


But this happiness did not last long. The veterinary surgeon departed,
departed for ever with his regiment, when it was transferred to a
distant place--to Siberia, it may be. And Olenka was left alone.


Now she was absolutely alone. Her father had long been dead, and
his armchair lay in the attic, covered with dust and lame of one
leg. She got thinner and plainer, and when people met her in the
street they did not look at her as they used to, and did not smile
to her; evidently her best years were over and left behind, and now
a new sort of life had begun for her, which did not bear thinking
about. In the evening Olenka sat in the porch, and heard the band
playing and the fireworks popping in the Tivoli, but now the sound
stirred no response. She looked into her yard without interest,
thought of nothing, wished for nothing, and afterwards, when night
came on she went to bed and dreamed of her empty yard. She ate and
drank as it were unwillingly.


And what was worst of all, she had no opinions of any sort. She saw
the objects about her and understood what she saw, but could not
form any opinion about them, and did not know what to talk about.
And how awful it is not to have any opinions! One sees a bottle,
for instance, or the rain, or a peasant driving in his cart, but
what the bottle is for, or the rain, or the peasant, and what is
the meaning of it, one can't say, and could not even for a thousand
roubles. When she had Kukin, or Pustovalov, or the veterinary
surgeon, Olenka could explain everything, and give her opinion about
anything you like, but now there was the same emptiness in her brain
and in her heart as there was in her yard outside. And it was as
harsh and as bitter as wormwood in the mouth.


Little by little the town grew in all directions. The road became
a street, and where the Tivoli and the timber-yard had been, there
were new turnings and houses. How rapidly time passes! Olenka's
house grew dingy, the roof got rusty, the shed sank on one side,
and the whole yard was overgrown with docks and stinging-nettles.
Olenka herself had grown plain and elderly; in summer she sat in
the porch, and her soul, as before, was empty and dreary and full
of bitterness. In winter she sat at her window and looked at the
snow. When she caught the scent of spring, or heard the chime of
the church bells, a sudden rush of memories from the past came over
her, there was a tender ache in her heart, and her eyes brimmed
over with tears; but this was only for a minute, and then came
emptiness again and the sense of the futility of life. The black
kitten, Briska, rubbed against her and purred softly, but Olenka
was not touched by these feline caresses. That was not what she
needed. She wanted a love that would absorb her whole being, her
whole soul and reason--that would give her ideas and an object
in life, and would warm her old blood. And she would shake the
kitten off her skirt and say with vexation:


"Get along; I don't want you!"


And so it was, day after day and year after year, and no joy, and
no opinions. Whatever Mavra, the cook, said she accepted.


One hot July day, towards evening, just as the cattle were being
driven away, and the whole yard was full of dust, some one suddenly
knocked at the gate. Olenka went to open it herself and was dumbfounded
when she looked out: she saw Smirnin, the veterinary surgeon,
grey-headed, and dressed as a civilian. She suddenly remembered
everything. She could not help crying and letting her head fall on
his breast without uttering a word, and in the violence of her
feeling she did not notice how they both walked into the house and
sat down to tea.


"My dear Vladimir Platonitch! What fate has brought you?" she
muttered, trembling with joy.


"I want to settle here for good, Olga Semyonovna," he told her. "I
have resigned my post, and have come to settle down and try my luck
on my own account. Besides, it's time for my boy to go to school.
He's a big boy. I am reconciled with my wife, you know."


"Where is she?' asked Olenka.


"She's at the hotel with the boy, and I'm looking for lodgings."


"Good gracious, my dear soul! Lodgings? Why not have my house? Why
shouldn't that suit you? Why, my goodness, I wouldn't take any
rent!" cried Olenka in a flutter, beginning to cry again. "You live
here, and the lodge will do nicely for me. Oh dear! how glad I am!"


Next day the roof was painted and the walls were whitewashed, and
Olenka, with her arms akimbo walked about the yard giving directions.
Her face was beaming with her old smile, and she was brisk and alert
as though she had waked from a long sleep. The veterinary's wife
arrived--a thin, plain lady, with short hair and a peevish
expression. With her was her little Sasha, a boy of ten, small for
his age, blue-eyed, chubby, with dimples in his cheeks. And scarcely
had the boy walked into the yard when he ran after the cat, and at
once there was the sound of his gay, joyous laugh.


"Is that your puss, auntie?" he asked Olenka. "When she has little
ones, do give us a kitten. Mamma is awfully afraid of mice."


Olenka talked to him, and gave him tea. Her heart warmed and there
was a sweet ache in her bosom, as though the boy had been her own
child. And when he sat at the table in the evening, going over his
lessons, she looked at him with deep tenderness and pity as she
murmured to herself:


"You pretty pet! . . . my precious! . . . Such a fair little thing,
and so clever."


"'An island is a piece of land which is entirely surrounded by
water,'" he read aloud.


"An island is a piece of land," she repeated, and this was the first
opinion to which she gave utterance with positive conviction after
so many years of silence and dearth of ideas.


Now she had opinions of her own, and at supper she talked to Sasha's
parents, saying how difficult the lessons were at the high schools,
but that yet the high school was better than a commercial one, since
with a high-school education all careers were open to one, such as
being a doctor or an engineer.


Sasha began going to the high school. His mother departed to Harkov
to her sister's and did not return; his father used to go off every
day to inspect cattle, and would often be away from home for three
days together, and it seemed to Olenka as though Sasha was entirely
abandoned, that he was not wanted at home, that he was being starved,
and she carried him off to her lodge and gave him a little room
there.


And for six months Sasha had lived in the lodge with her. Every
morning Olenka came into his bedroom and found him fast asleep,
sleeping noiselessly with his hand under his cheek. She was sorry
to wake him.


"Sashenka," she would say mournfully, "get up, darling. It's time
for school."


He would get up, dress and say his prayers, and then sit down to
breakfast, drink three glasses of tea, and eat two large cracknels
and a half a buttered roll. All this time he was hardly awake and
a little ill-humoured in consequence.


"You don't quite know your fable, Sashenka," Olenka would say,
looking at him as though he were about to set off on a long journey.
"What a lot of trouble I have with you! You must work and do your
best, darling, and obey your teachers."


"Oh, do leave me alone!" Sasha would say.


Then he would go down the street to school, a little figure, wearing
a big cap and carrying a satchel on his shoulder. Olenka would
follow him noiselessly.


"Sashenka!" she would call after him, and she would pop into his
hand a date or a caramel. When he reached the street where the
school was, he would feel ashamed of being followed by a tall, stout
woman, he would turn round and say:


"You'd better go home, auntie. I can go the rest of the way alone."


She would stand still and look after him fixedly till he had
disappeared at the school-gate.


Ah, how she loved him! Of her former attachments not one had been
so deep; never had her soul surrendered to any feeling so spontaneously,
so disinterestedly, and so joyously as now that her maternal instincts
were aroused. For this little boy with the dimple in his cheek and
the big school cap, she would have given her whole life, she would
have given it with joy and tears of tenderness. Why? Who can tell
why?


When she had seen the last of Sasha, she returned home, contented
and serene, brimming over with love; her face, which had grown
younger during the last six months, smiled and beamed; people meeting
her looked at her with pleasure.


"Good-morning, Olga Semyonovna, darling. How are you, darling?"


"The lessons at the high school are very difficult now," she would
relate at the market. "It's too much; in the first class yesterday
they gave him a fable to learn by heart, and a Latin translation
and a problem. You know it's too much for a little chap."


And she would begin talking about the teachers, the lessons, and
the school books, saying just what Sasha said.


At three o'clock they had dinner together: in the evening they
learned their lessons together and cried. When she put him to bed,
she would stay a long time making the Cross over him and murmuring
a prayer; then she would go to bed and dream of that far-away misty
future when Sasha would finish his studies and become a doctor or
an engineer, would have a big house of his own with horses and a
carriage, would get married and have children. . . . She would fall
asleep still thinking of the same thing, and tears would run down
her cheeks from her closed eyes, while the black cat lay purring
beside her: "Mrr, mrr, mrr."


Suddenly there would come a loud knock at the gate.


Olenka would wake up breathless with alarm, her heart throbbing.
Half a minute later would come another knock.


"It must be a telegram from Harkov," she would think, beginning to
tremble from head to foot. "Sasha's mother is sending for him from
Harkov. . . . Oh, mercy on us!"


She was in despair. Her head, her hands, and her feet would turn
chill, and she would feel that she was the most unhappy woman in
the world. But another minute would pass, voices would be heard:
it would turn out to be the veterinary surgeon coming home from the
club.


"Well, thank God!" she would think.


And gradually the load in her heart would pass off, and she would
feel at ease. She would go back to bed thinking of Sasha, who lay
sound asleep in the next room, sometimes crying out in his sleep:


"I'll give it you! Get away! Shut up!"




ARIADNE


ON the deck of a steamer sailing from Odessa to Sevastopol, a rather
good-looking gentleman, with a little round beard, came up to me
to smoke, and said:


"Notice those Germans sitting near the shelter? Whenever Germans
or Englishmen get together, they talk about the crops, the price
of wool, or their personal affairs. But for some reason or other
when we Russians get together we never discuss anything but women
and abstract subjects--but especially women."


This gentleman's face was familiar to me already. We had returned
from abroad the evening before in the same train, and at Volotchisk
when the luggage was being examined by the Customs, I saw him
standing with a lady, his travelling companion, before a perfect
mountain of trunks and baskets filled with ladies' clothes, and I
noticed how embarrassed and downcast he was when he had to pay duty
on some piece of silk frippery, and his companion protested and
threatened to make a complaint. Afterwards, on the way to Odessa,
I saw him carrying little pies and oranges to the ladies' compartment.


It was rather damp; the vessel swayed a little, and the ladies had
retired to their cabins.


The gentleman with the little round beard sat down beside me and
continued:


"Yes, when Russians come together they discuss nothing but abstract
subjects and women. We are so intellectual, so solemn, that we utter
nothing but truths and can discuss only questions of a lofty order.
The Russian actor does not know how to be funny; he acts with
profundity even in a farce. We're just the same: when we have got
to talk of trifles we treat them only from an exalted point of view.
It comes from a lack of boldness, sincerity, and simplicity. We
talk so often about women, I fancy, because we are dissatisfied.
We take too ideal a view of women, and make demands out of all
proportion with what reality can give us; we get something utterly
different from what we want, and the result is dissatisfaction,
shattered hopes, and inward suffering, and if any one is suffering,
he's bound to talk of it. It does not bore you to go on with this
conversation?


"No, not in the least."


"In that case, allow me to introduce myself," said my companion,
rising from his seat a little:


"Ivan Ilyitch Shamohin, a Moscow landowner of a sort. . . . You I
know very well."


He sat down and went on, looking at me with a genuine and friendly
expression:


"A mediocre philosopher, like Max Nordau, would explain these
incessant conversations about women as a form of erotic madness,
or would put it down to our having been slave-owners and so on; I
take quite a different view of it. I repeat, we are dissatisfied
because we are idealists. We want the creatures who bear us and our
children to be superior to us and to everything in the world. When
we are young we adore and poeticize those with whom we are in love:
love and happiness with us are synonyms. Among us in Russia marriage
without love is despised, sensuality is ridiculed and inspires
repulsion, and the greatest success is enjoyed by those tales and
novels in which women are beautiful, poetical, and exalted; and if
the Russian has been for years in ecstasies over Raphael's Madonna,
or is eager for the emancipation of women, I assure you there is
no affectation about it. But the trouble is that when we have been
married or been intimate with a woman for some two or three years,
we begin to feel deceived and disillusioned: we pair off with others,
and again--disappointment, again--repulsion, and in the long
run we become convinced that women are lying, trivial, fussy, unfair,
undeveloped, cruel--in fact, far from being superior, are
immeasurably inferior to us men. And in our dissatisfaction and
disappointment there is nothing left for us but to grumble and talk
about what we've been so cruelly deceived in."


While Shamohin was talking I noticed that the Russian language and
our Russian surroundings gave him great pleasure. This was probably
because he had been very homesick abroad. Though he praised the
Russians and ascribed to them a rare idealism, he did not disparage
foreigners, and that I put down to his credit. It could be seen,
too, that there was some uneasiness in his soul, that he wanted to
talk more of himself than of women, and that I was in for a long
story in the nature of a confession. And when we had asked for a
bottle of wine and had each of us drunk a glass, this was how he
did in fact begin:


"I remember in a novel of Weltmann's some one says, 'So that's the
story!' and some one else answers, 'No, that's not the story--
that's only the introduction to the story.' In the same way what
I've said so far is only the introduction; what I really want to
tell you is my own love story. Excuse me, I must ask you again; it
won't bore you to listen?"


I told him it would not, and he went on:


The scene of my story is laid in the Moscow province in one of its
northern districts. The scenery there, I must tell you, is exquisite.
Our homestead is on the high bank of a rapid stream, where the water
chatters noisily day and night: imagine a big old garden, neat
flower-beds, beehives, a kitchen-garden, and below it a river with
leafy willows, which, when there is a heavy dew on them, have a
lustreless look as though they had turned grey; and on the other
side a meadow, and beyond the meadow on the upland a terrible, dark
pine forest. In that forest delicious, reddish agarics grow in
endless profusion, and elks still live in its deepest recesses.
When I am nailed up in my coffin I believe I shall still dream of
those early mornings, you know, when the sun hurts your eyes: or
the wonderful spring evenings when the nightingales and the landrails
call in the garden and beyond the garden, and sounds of the harmonica
float across from the village, while they play the piano indoors
and the stream babbles . . . when there is such music, in fact,
that one wants at the same time to cry and to sing aloud.


We have not much arable land, but our pasture makes up for it, and
with the forest yields about two thousand roubles a year. I am the
only son of my father; we are both modest persons, and with my
father's pension that sum was amply sufficient for us.


The first three years after finishing at the university I spent in
the country, looking after the estate and constantly expecting to
be elected on some local assembly; but what was most important, I
was violently in love with an extraordinarily beautiful and fascinating
girl. She was the sister of our neighbour, Kotlovitch, a ruined
landowner who had on his estate pine-apples, marvellous peaches,
lightning conductors, a fountain in the courtyard, and at the same
time not a farthing in his pocket. He did nothing and knew how to
do nothing. He was as flabby as though he had been made of boiled
turnip; he used to doctor the peasants by homeopathy and was
interested in spiritualism. He was, however, a man of great delicacy
and mildness, and by no means a fool, but I have no fondness for
these gentlemen who converse with spirits and cure peasant women
by magnetism. In the first place, the ideas of people who are not
intellectually free are always in a muddle, and it's extremely
difficult to talk to them; and, secondly, they usually love no one,
and have nothing to do with women, and their mysticism has an
unpleasant effect on sensitive people. I did not care for his
appearance either. He was tall, stout, white-skinned, with a little
head, little shining eyes, and chubby white fingers. He did not
shake hands, but kneaded one's hands in his. And he was always
apologising. If he asked for anything it was "Excuse me"; if he
gave you anything it was "Excuse me" too.


As for his sister, she was a character out of a different opera. I
must explain that I had not been acquainted with the Kotlovitches
in my childhood and early youth, for my father had been a professor
at N., and we had for many years lived away. When I did make their
acquaintance the girl was twenty-two, had left school long before,
and had spent two or three years in Moscow with a wealthy aunt who
brought her out into society. When I was introduced and first had
to talk to her, what struck me most of all was her rare and beautiful
name--Ariadne. It suited her so wonderfully! She was a brunette,
very thin, very slender, supple, elegant, and extremely graceful,
with refined and exceedingly noble features. Her eyes were shining,
too, but her brother's shone with a cold sweetness, mawkish as
sugar-candy, while hers had the glow of youth, proud and beautiful.
She conquered me on the first day of our acquaintance, and indeed
it was inevitable. My first impression was so overwhelming that to
this day I cannot get rid of my illusions; I am still tempted to
imagine that nature had some grand, marvellous design when she
created that girl.


Ariadne's voice, her walk, her hat, even her footprints on the sandy
bank where she used to angle for gudgeon, filled me with delight
and a passionate hunger for life. I judged of her spiritual being
from her lovely face and lovely figure, and every word, every smile
of Ariadne's bewitched me, conquered me and forced me to believe
in the loftiness of her soul. She was friendly, ready to talk, gay
and simple in her manners. She had a poetic belief in God, made
poetic reflections about death, and there was such a wealth of
varying shades in her spiritual organisation that even her faults
seemed in her to carry with them peculiar, charming qualities.
Suppose she wanted a new horse and had no money--what did that
matter? Something might be sold or pawned, or if the steward swore
that nothing could possibly be sold or pawned, the iron roofs might
be torn off the lodges and taken to the factory, or at the very
busiest time the farm-horses might be driven to the market and sold
there for next to nothing. These unbridled desires reduced the whole
household to despair at times, but she expressed them with such
refinement that everything was forgiven her; all things were permitted
her as to a goddess or to CÃ¦sar's wife. My love was pathetic and
was soon noticed by every one--my father, the neighbours, and the
peasants--and they all sympathised with me. When I stood the
workmen vodka, they would bow and say: "May the Kotlovitch young
lady be your bride, please God!"


And Ariadne herself knew that I loved her. She would often ride
over on horseback or drive in the char-Ã -banc to see us, and would
spend whole days with me and my father. She made great friends with
the old man, and he even taught her to bicycle, which was his
favourite amusement.


I remember helping her to get on the bicycle one evening, and she
looked so lovely that I felt as though I were burning my hands when
I touched her. I shuddered with rapture, and when the two of them,
my old father and she, both looking so handsome and elegant, bicycled
side by side along the main road, a black horse ridden by the steward
dashed aside on meeting them, and it seemed to me that it dashed
aside because it too was overcome by her beauty. My love, my worship,
touched Ariadne and softened her; she had a passionate longing to
be captivated like me and to respond with the same love. It was so
poetical!


But she was incapable of really loving as I did, for she was cold
and already somewhat corrupted. There was a demon in her, whispering
to her day and night that she was enchanting, adorable; and, having
no definite idea for what object she was created, or for what purpose
life had been given her, she never pictured herself in the future
except as very wealthy and distinguished, she had visions of balls,
races, liveries, of sumptuous drawing-rooms, of a salon of her own,
and of a perfect swarm of counts, princes, ambassadors, celebrated
painters and artists, all of them adoring her and in ecstasies over
her beauty and her dresses. . . .


This thirst for personal success, and this continual concentration
of the mind in one direction, makes people cold, and Ariadne was
cold--to me, to nature, and to music. Meanwhile time was passing,
and still there were no ambassadors on the scene. Ariadne went on
living with her brother, the spiritualist: things went from bad to
worse, so that she had nothing to buy hats and dresses with, and
had to resort to all sorts of tricks and dodges to conceal her
poverty.


As luck would have it, a certain Prince Maktuev, a wealthy man but
an utterly insignificant person, had paid his addresses to her when
she was living at her aunt's in Moscow. She had refused him,
point-blank. But now she was fretted by the worm of repentance that
she had refused him; just as a peasant pouts with repulsion at a
mug of kvass with cockroaches in it but yet drinks it, so she frowned
disdainfully at the recollection of the prince, and yet she would
say to me: "Say what you like, there is something inexplicable,
fascinating, in a title. . . ."


She dreamed of a title, of a brilliant position, and at the same
time she did not want to let me go. However one may dream of
ambassadors one's heart is not a stone, and one has wistful feelings
for one's youth. Ariadne tried to fall in love, made a show of being
in love, and even swore that she loved me. But I am a highly strung
and sensitive man; when I am loved I feel it even at a distance,
without vows and assurances; at once I felt as it were a coldness
in the air, and when she talked to me of love, it seemed to me as
though I were listening to the singing of a metal nightingale.
Ariadne was herself aware that she was lacking in something. She
was vexed and more than once I saw her cry. Another time--can you
imagine it?--all of a sudden she embraced me and kissed me. It
happened in the evening on the river-bank, and I saw by her eyes
that she did not love me, but was embracing me from curiosity, to
test herself and to see what came of it. And I felt dreadful. I
took her hands and said to her in despair: "These caresses without
love cause me suffering!"


"What a queer fellow you are!" she said with annoyance, and walked
away.


Another year or two might have passed, and in all probability I
should have married her, and so my story would have ended, but fate
was pleased to arrange our romance differently. It happened that a
new personage appeared on our horizon. Ariadne's brother had a visit
from an old university friend called Mihail Ivanitch Lubkov, a
charming man of whom coachmen and footmen used to say: "An entertaining
gentleman." He was a man of medium height, lean and bald, with a
face like a good-natured bourgeois, not interesting, but pale and
presentable, with a stiff, well-kept moustache, with a neck like
gooseskin, and a big Adam's apple. He used to wear pince-nez on a
wide black ribbon, lisped, and could not pronounce either _r_ or
_l_. He was always in good spirits, everything amused him.


He had made an exceedingly foolish marriage at twenty, and had
acquired two houses in Moscow as part of his wife's dowry. He began
doing them up and building a bath-house, and was completely ruined.
Now his wife and four children lodged in Oriental Buildings in great
poverty, and he had to support them--and this amused him. He was
thirty-six and his wife was by now forty-two, and that, too, amused
him. His mother, a conceited, sulky personage, with aristocratic
pretensions, despised his wife and lived apart with a perfect
menagerie of cats and dogs, and he had to allow her seventy-five
roubles a month also; he was, too, a man of taste, liked lunching
at the Slavyansky Bazaar and dining at the Hermitage; he needed a
great deal of money, but his uncle only allowed him two thousand
roubles a year, which was not enough, and for days together he would
run about Moscow with his tongue out, as the saying is, looking for
some one to borrow from--and this, too, amused him. He had come
to Kotlovitch to find in the lap of nature, as he said, a rest from
family life. At dinner, at supper, and on our walks, he talked about
his wife, about his mother, about his creditors, about the bailiffs,
and laughed at them; he laughed at himself and assured us that,
thanks to his talent for borrowing, he had made a great number of
agreeable acquaintances. He laughed without ceasing and we laughed
too. Moreover, in his company we spent our time differently. I was
more inclined to quiet, so to say idyllic pleasures; I liked fishing,
evening walks, gathering mushrooms; Lubkov preferred picnics,
fireworks, hunting. He used to get up picnics three times a week,
and Ariadne, with an earnest and inspired face, used to write a
list of oysters, champagne, sweets, and used to send me into Moscow
to get them, without inquiring, of course, whether I had money. And
at the picnics there were toasts and laughter, and again mirthful
descriptions of how old his wife was, what fat lap-dogs his mother
had, and what charming people his creditors were.


Lubkov was fond of nature, but he regarded it as something long
familiar and at the same time, in reality, infinitely beneath himself
and created for his pleasure. He would sometimes stand still before
some magnificent landscape and say: "It would be nice to have tea
here."


One day, seeing Ariadne walking in the distance with a parasol, he
nodded towards her and said:


"She's thin, and that's what I like; I don't like fat women."


This made me wince. I asked him not to speak like that about women
before me. He looked at me in surprise and said:


"What is there amiss in my liking thin women and not caring for fat
ones?"


I made no answer. Afterwards, being in very good spirits and a
trifle elevated, he said:


"I've noticed Ariadne Grigoryevna likes you. I can't understand why
you don't go in and win."


His words made me feel uncomfortable, and with some embarrassment
I told him how I looked at love and women.


"I don't know," he sighed; "to my thinking, a woman's a woman and
a man's a man. Ariadne Grigoryevna may be poetical and exalted, as
you say, but it doesn't follow that she must be superior to the
laws of nature. You see for yourself that she has reached the age
when she must have a husband or a lover. I respect women as much
as you do, but I don't think certain relations exclude poetry.
Poetry's one thing and love is another. It's just the same as it
is in farming. The beauty of nature is one thing and the income
from your forests or fields is quite another."


When Ariadne and I were fishing, Lubkov would lie on the sand close
by and make fun of me, or lecture me on the conduct of life.


"I wonder, my dear sir, how you can live without a love affair,"
he would say. "You are young, handsome, interesting--in fact,
you're a man not to be sniffed at, yet you live like a monk. Och!
I can't stand these fellows who are old at twenty-eight! I'm nearly
ten years older than you are, and yet which of us is the younger?
Ariadne Grigoryevna, which?"


"You, of course," Ariadne answered him.


And when he was bored with our silence and the attention with which
we stared at our floats he went home, and she said, looking at me
angrily:


"You're really not a man, but a mush, God forgive me! A man ought
to be able to be carried away by his feelings, he ought to be able
to be mad, to make mistakes, to suffer! A woman will forgive you
audacity and insolence, but she will never forgive your reasonableness!"


She was angry in earnest, and went on:


"To succeed, a man must be resolute and bold. Lubkov is not so
handsome as you are, but he is more interesting. He will always
succeed with women because he's not like you; he's a man. . . ."


And there was actually a note of exasperation in her voice.


One day at supper she began saying, not addressing me, that if she
were a man she would not stagnate in the country, but would travel,
would spend the winter somewhere aboard--in Italy, for instance.
Oh, Italy! At this point my father unconsciously poured oil on the
flames; he began telling us at length about Italy, how splendid it
was there, the exquisite scenery, the museums. Ariadne suddenly
conceived a burning desire to go to Italy. She positively brought
her fist down on the table and her eyes flashed as she said: "I
must go!"


After that came conversations every day about Italy: how splendid
it would be in Italy--ah, Italy!--oh, Italy! And when Ariadne
looked at me over her shoulder, from her cold and obstinate expression
I saw that in her dreams she had already conquered Italy with all
its salons, celebrated foreigners and tourists, and there was no
holding her back now. I advised her to wait a little, to put off
her tour for a year or two, but she frowned disdainfully and said:


"You're as prudent as an old woman!"


Lubkov was in favour of the tour. He said it could be done very
cheaply, and he, too, would go to Italy and have a rest there from
family life.


I behaved, I confess, as naÃ¯vely as a schoolboy.


Not from jealousy, but from a foreboding of something terrible and
extraordinary, I tried as far as possible not to leave them alone
together, and they made fun of me. For instance, when I went in
they would pretend they had just been kissing one another, and so
on. But lo and behold, one fine morning, her plump, white-skinned
brother, the spiritualist, made his appearance and expressed his
desire to speak to me alone.


He was a man without will; in spite of his education and his delicacy
he could never resist reading another person's letter, if it lay
before him on the table. And now he admitted that he had by chance
read a letter of Lubkov's to Ariadne.


"From that letter I learned that she is very shortly going abroad.
My dear fellow, I am very much upset! Explain it to me for goodness'
sake. I can make nothing of it!"


As he said this he breathed hard, breathing straight in my face and
smelling of boiled beef.


"Excuse me for revealing the secret of this letter to you, but you
are Ariadne's friend, she respects you. Perhaps you know something
of it. She wants to go away, but with whom? Mr. Lubkov is proposing
to go with her. Excuse me, but this is very strange of Mr. Lubkov;
he is a married man, he has children, and yet he is making a
declaration of love; he is writing to Ariadne 'darling.' Excuse me,
but it is so strange!"


I turned cold all over; my hands and feet went numb and I felt an
ache in my chest, as if a three-cornered stone had been driven into
it. Kotlovitch sank helplessly into an easy-chair, and his hands
fell limply at his sides.


"What can I do?" I inquired.


"Persuade her. . . . Impress her mind. . . . Just consider, what
is Lubkov to her? Is he a match for her? Oh, good God! How awful
it is, how awful it is!" he went on, clutching his head. "She has
had such splendid offers--Prince Maktuev and . . . and others.
The prince adores her, and only last Wednesday week his late
grandfather, Ilarion, declared positively that Ariadne would be his
wife--positively! His grandfather Ilarion is dead, but he is a
wonderfully intelligent person; we call up his spirit every day."


After this conversation I lay awake all night and thought of shooting
myself. In the morning I wrote five letters and tore them all up.
Then I sobbed in the barn. Then I took a sum of money from my father
and set off for the Caucasus without saying good-bye.


Of course, a woman's a woman and a man's a man, but can all that
be as simple in our day as it was before the Flood, and can it be
that I, a cultivated man endowed with a complex spiritual organisation,
ought to explain the intense attraction I feel towards a woman
simply by the fact that her bodily formation is different from mine?
Oh, how awful that would be! I want to believe that in his struggle
with nature the genius of man has struggled with physical love too,
as with an enemy, and that, if he has not conquered it, he has at
least succeeded in tangling it in a net-work of illusions of
brotherhood and love; and for me, at any rate, it is no longer a
simple instinct of my animal nature as with a dog or a toad, but
is real love, and every embrace is spiritualised by a pure impulse
of the heart and respect for the woman. In reality, a disgust for
the animal instinct has been trained for ages in hundreds of
generations; it is inherited by me in my blood and forms part of
my nature, and if I poetize love, is not that as natural and
inevitable in our day as my ears' not being able to move and my not
being covered with fur? I fancy that's how the majority of civilised
people look at it, so that the absence of the moral, poetical element
in love is treated in these days as a phenomenon, as a sign of
atavism; they say it is a symptom of degeneracy, of many forms of
insanity. It is true that, in poetizing love, we assume in those
we love qualities that are lacking in them, and that is a source
of continual mistakes and continual miseries for us. But to my
thinking it is better, even so; that is, it is better to suffer
than to find complacency on the basis of woman being woman and man
being man.


In Tiflis I received a letter from my father. He wrote that Ariadne
Grigoryevna had on such a day gone abroad, intending to spend the
whole winter away. A month later I returned home. It was by now
autumn. Every week Ariadne sent my father extremely interesting
letters on scented paper, written in an excellent literary style.
It is my opinion that every woman can be a writer. Ariadne described
in great detail how it had not been easy for her to make it up with
her aunt and induce the latter to give her a thousand roubles for
the journey, and what a long time she had spent in Moscow trying
to find an old lady, a distant relation, in order to persuade her
to go with her. Such a profusion of detail suggested fiction, and
I realised, of course, that she had no chaperon with her.


Soon afterwards I, too, had a letter from her, also scented and
literary. She wrote that she had missed me, missed my beautiful,
intelligent, loving eyes. She reproached me affectionately for
wasting my youth, for stagnating in the country when I might, like
her, be living in paradise under the palms, breathing the fragrance
of the orange-trees. And she signed herself "Your forsaken Ariadne."
Two days later came another letter in the same style, signed "Your
forgotten Ariadne." My mind was confused. I loved her passionately,
I dreamed of her every night, and then this "your forsaken," "your
forgotten"--what did it mean? What was it for? And then the
dreariness of the country, the long evenings, the disquieting
thoughts of Lubkov. . . . The uncertainty tortured me, and poisoned
my days and nights; it became unendurable. I could not bear it and
went abroad.


Ariadne summoned me to Abbazzia. I arrived there on a bright warm
day after rain; the rain-drops were still hanging on the trees and
glistening on the huge, barrack-like dÃ©pendance where Ariadne and
Lubkov were living.


They were not at home. I went into the park; wandered about the
avenues, then sat down. An Austrian General, with his hands behind
him, walked past me, with red stripes on his trousers such as our
generals wear. A baby was wheeled by in a perambulator and the
wheels squeaked on the damp sand. A decrepit old man with jaundice
passed, then a crowd of Englishwomen, a Catholic priest, then the
Austrian General again. A military band, only just arrived from
Fiume, with glittering brass instruments, sauntered by to the
bandstand--they began playing.


Have you ever been at Abbazzia? It's a filthy little Slav town with
only one street, which stinks, and in which one can't walk after
rain without goloshes. I had read so much and always with such
intense feeling about this earthly paradise that when afterwards,
holding up my trousers, I cautiously crossed the narrow street, and
in my ennui bought some hard pears from an old peasant woman who,
recognising me as a Russian, said: "Tcheeteery" for "tchetyry"
(four)--"davadtsat" for "dvadtsat" (twenty), and when I wondered
in perplexity where to go and what to do here, and when I inevitably
met Russians as disappointed as I was, I began to feel vexed and
ashamed. There is a calm bay there full of steamers and boats with
coloured sails. From there I could see Fiume and the distant islands
covered with lilac mist, and it would have been picturesque if the
view over the bay had not been hemmed in by the hotels and their
dÃ©pendances--buildings in an absurd, trivial style of architecture,
with which the whole of that green shore has been covered by greedy
money grubbers, so that for the most part you see nothing in this
little paradise but windows, terraces, and little squares with
tables and waiters' black coats. There is a park such as you find
now in every watering-place abroad. And the dark, motionless, silent
foliage of the palms, and the bright yellow sand in the avenue, and
the bright green seats, and the glitter of the braying military
horns--all this sickened me in ten minutes! And yet one is obliged
for some reason to spend ten days, ten weeks, there!


Having been dragged reluctantly from one of these watering-places
to another, I have been more and more struck by the inconvenient
and niggardly life led by the wealthy and well-fed, the dulness and
feebleness of their imagination, the lack of boldness in their
tastes and desires. And how much happier are those tourists, old
and young, who, not having the money to stay in hotels, live where
they can, admire the view of the sea from the tops of the mountains,
lying on the green grass, walk instead of riding, see the forests
and villages at close quarters, observe the customs of the country,
listen to its songs, fall in love with its women. . . .


While I was sitting in the park, it began to get dark, and in the
twilight my Ariadne appeared, elegant and dressed like a princess;
after her walked Lubkov, wearing a new loose-fitting suit, bought
probably in Vienna.


"Why are you cross with me?" he was saying. "What have I done to
you?"


Seeing me, she uttered a cry of joy, and probably, if we had not
been in the park, would have thrown herself on my neck. She pressed
my hands warmly and laughed; and I laughed too and almost cried
with emotion. Questions followed, of the village, of my father,
whether I had seen her brother, and so on. She insisted on my looking
her straight in the face, and asked if I remembered the gudgeon,
our little quarrels, the picnics. . . .


"How nice it all was really!" she sighed. "But we're not having a
slow time here either. We have a great many acquaintances, my dear,
my best of friends! To-morrow I will introduce you to a Russian
family here, but please buy yourself another hat." She scrutinised
me and frowned. "Abbazzia is not the country," she said; "here one
must be _comme il faut_."


Then we went to the restaurant. Ariadne was laughing and mischievous
all the time; she kept calling me "dear," "good," "clever," and
seemed as though she could not believe her eyes that I was with
her. We sat on till eleven o'clock, and parted very well satisfied
both with the supper and with each other.


Next day Ariadne presented me to the Russian family as: "The son
of a distinguished professor whose estate is next to ours."


She talked to this family about nothing but estates and crops, and
kept appealing to me. She wanted to appear to be a very wealthy
landowner, and did, in fact, succeed in doing so. Her manner was
superb like that of a real aristocrat, which indeed she was by
birth.


"But what a person my aunt is!" she said suddenly, looking at me
with a smile. "We had a slight tiff, and she has bolted off to
Meran. What do you say to that?"


Afterwards when we were walking in the park I asked her:


"What aunt were you talking of just now? What aunt is that?"


"That was a saving lie," laughed Ariadne. "They must not know I'm
without a chaperon."


After a moment's silence she came closer to me and said:


"My dear, my dear, do be friends with Lubkov. He is so unhappy! His
wife and mother are simply awful."


She used the formal mode of address in speaking to Lubkov, and when
she was going up to bed she said good-night to him exactly as she
did to me, and their rooms were on different floors. All this made
me hope that it was all nonsense, and that there was no sort of
love affair between them, and I felt at ease when I met him. And
when one day he asked me for the loan of three hundred roubles, I
gave it to him with the greatest pleasure.


Every day we spent in enjoying ourselves and in nothing but enjoying
ourselves; we strolled in the park, we ate, we drank. Every day
there were conversations with the Russian family. By degrees I got
used to the fact that if I went into the park I should be sure to
meet the old man with jaundice, the Catholic priest, and the Austrian
General, who always carried a pack of little cards, and wherever
it was possible sat down and played patience, nervously twitching
his shoulders. And the band played the same thing over and over
again.


At home in the country I used to feel ashamed to meet the peasants
when I was fishing or on a picnic party on a working day; here too
I was ashamed at the sight of the footmen, the coachmen, and the
workmen who met us. It always seemed to me they were looking at me
and thinking: "Why are you doing nothing?" And I was conscious of
this feeling of shame every day from morning to night. It was a
strange, unpleasant, monotonous time; it was only varied by Lubkov's
borrowing from me now a hundred, now fifty guldens, and being
suddenly revived by the money as a morphia-maniac is by morphia,
beginning to laugh loudly at his wife, at himself, at his creditors.


At last it began to be rainy and cold. We went to Italy, and I
telegraphed to my father begging him for mercy's sake to send me
eight hundred roubles to Rome. We stayed in Venice, in Bologna, in
Florence, and in every town invariably put up at an expensive hotel,
where we were charged separately for lights, and for service, and
for heating, and for bread at lunch, and for the right of having
dinner by ourselves. We ate enormously. In the morning they gave
us _cafÃ© complet_; at one o'clock lunch: meat, fish, some sort of
omelette, cheese, fruits, and wine. At six o'clock dinner of eight
courses with long intervals, during which we drank beer and wine.
At nine o'clock tea. At midnight Ariadne would declare she was
hungry, and ask for ham and boiled eggs. We would eat to keep her
company.


In the intervals between meals we used to rush about the museums
and exhibitions in continual anxiety for fear we should be late for
dinner or lunch. I was bored at the sight of the pictures; I longed
to be at home to rest; I was exhausted, looked about for a chair
and hypocritically repeated after other people: "How exquisite,
what atmosphere!" Like overfed boa constrictors, we noticed only
the most glaring objects. The shop windows hypnotised us; we went
into ecstasies over imitation brooches and bought a mass of useless
trumpery.


The same thing happened in Rome, where it rained and there was a
cold wind. After a heavy lunch we went to look at St. Peter's, and
thanks to our replete condition and perhaps the bad weather, it
made no sort of impression on us, and detecting in each other an
indifference to art, we almost quarrelled.


The money came from my father. I went to get it, I remember, in the
morning. Lubkov went with me.


"The present cannot be full and happy when one has a past," said
he. "I have heavy burdens left on me by the past. However, if only
I get the money, it's no great matter, but if not, I'm in a fix.
Would you believe it, I have only eight francs left, yet I must
send my wife a hundred and my mother another. And we must live here
too. Ariadne's like a child; she won't enter into the position, and
flings away money like a duchess. Why did she buy a watch yesterday?
And, tell me, what object is there in our going on playing at being
good children? Why, our hiding our relations from the servants and
our friends costs us from ten to fifteen francs a day, as I have
to have a separate room. What's the object of it?"


I felt as though a sharp stone had been turned round in my chest.
There was no uncertainty now; it was all clear to me. I turned cold
all over, and at once made a resolution to give up seeing them, to
run away from them, to go home at once. . . .


"To get on terms with a woman is easy enough," Lubkov went on. "You
have only to undress her; but afterwards what a bore it is, what a
silly business!"


When I counted over the money I received he said:


"If you don't lend me a thousand francs, I am faced with complete
ruin. Your money is the only resource left to me."


I gave him the money, and he at once revived and began laughing
about his uncle, a queer fish, who could never keep his address
secret from his wife. When I reached the hotel I packed and paid
my bill. I had still to say good-bye to Ariadne.


I knocked at the door.


"Entrez!"


In her room was the usual morning disorder: tea-things on the table,
an unfinished roll, an eggshell; a strong overpowering reek of
scent. The bed had not been made, and it was evident that two had
slept in it.


Ariadne herself had only just got out of bed and was now with her
hair down in a flannel dressing-jacket.


I said good-morning to her, and then sat in silence for a minute
while she tried to put her hair tidy, and then I asked her, trembling
all over:


"Why . . . why . . . did you send for me here?"


Evidently she guessed what I was thinking; she took me by the hand
and said:


"I want you to be here, you are so pure."


I felt ashamed of my emotion, of my trembling. And I was afraid I
might begin sobbing, too! I went out without saying another word,
and within an hour I was sitting in the train. All the journey, for
some reason, I imagined Ariadne with child, and she seemed disgusting
to me, and all the women I saw in the trains and at the stations
looked to me, for some reason, as if they too were with child, and
they too seemed disgusting and pitiable. I was in the position of
a greedy, passionate miser who should suddenly discover that all
his gold coins were false. The pure, gracious images which my
imagination, warmed by love, had cherished for so long, my plans,
my hopes, my memories, my ideas of love and of woman--all now
were jeering and putting out their tongues at me. "Ariadne," I kept
asking with horror, "that young, intellectual, extraordinarily
beautiful girl, the daughter of a senator, carrying on an intrigue
with such an ordinary, uninteresting vulgarian? But why should she
not love Lubkov?" I answered myself. "In what is he inferior to me?
Oh, let her love any one she likes, but why lie to me? But why is
she bound to be open with me?" And so I went on over and over again
till I was stupefied.


It was cold in the train; I was travelling first class, but even
so there were three on a side, there were no double windows, the
outer door opened straight into the compartment, and I felt as
though I were in the stocks, cramped, abandoned, pitiful, and my
legs were fearfully numb, and at the same time I kept recalling how
fascinating she had been that morning in her dressing-jacket and
with her hair down, and I was suddenly overcome by such acute
jealousy that I leapt up in anguish, so that my neighbours stared
at me in wonder and positive alarm.


At home I found deep snow and twenty degrees of frost. I'm fond of
the winter; I'm fond of it because at that time, even in the hardest
frosts, it's particularly snug at home. It's pleasant to put on
one's fur jacket and felt overboots on a clear frosty day, to do
something in the garden or in the yard, or to read in a well warmed
room, to sit in my father's study before the open fire, to wash in
my country bath-house. . . . Only if there is no mother in the
house, no sister and no children, it is somehow dreary on winter
evenings, and they seem extraordinarily long and quiet. And the
warmer and snugger it is, the more acutely is this lack felt. In
the winter when I came back from abroad, the evenings were endlessly
long, I was intensely depressed, so depressed that I could not even
read; in the daytime I was coming and going, clearing away the snow
in the garden or feeding the chickens and the calves, but in the
evening it was all up with me.


I had never cared for visitors before, but now I was glad of them,
for I knew there was sure to be talk of Ariadne. Kotlovitch, the
spiritualist, used often to come to talk about his sister, and
sometimes he brought with him his friend Prince Maktuev, who was
as much in love with Ariadne as I was. To sit in Ariadne's room,
to finger the keys of her piano, to look at her music was a necessity
for the prince--he could not live without it; and the spirit of
his grandfather Ilarion was still predicting that sooner or later
she would be his wife. The prince usually stayed a long time with
us, from lunch to midnight, saying nothing all the time; in silence
he would drink two or three bottles of beer, and from time to time,
to show that he too was taking part in the conversation, he would
laugh an abrupt, melancholy, foolish laugh. Before going home he
would always take me aside and ask me in an undertone: "When did
you see Ariadne Grigoryevna last? Was she quite well? I suppose
she's not tired of being out there?"


Spring came on. There was the harrowing to do and then the sowing
of spring corn and clover. I was sad, but there was the feeling of
spring. One longed to accept the inevitable. Working in the fields
and listening to the larks, I asked myself: "Couldn't I have done
with this question of personal happiness once and for all? Couldn't
I lay aside my fancy and marry a simple peasant girl?"


Suddenly when we were at our very busiest, I got a letter with the
Italian stamp, and the clover and the beehives and the calves and
the peasant girl all floated away like smoke. This time Ariadne
wrote that she was profoundly, infinitely unhappy. She reproached
me for not holding out a helping hand to her, for looking down upon
her from the heights of my virtue and deserting her at the moment
of danger. All this was written in a large, nervous handwriting
with blots and smudges, and it was evident that she wrote in haste
and distress. In conclusion she besought me to come and save her.
Again my anchor was hauled up and I was carried away. Ariadne was
in Rome. I arrived late in the evening, and when she saw me, she
sobbed and threw herself on my neck. She had not changed at all
that winter, and was just as young and charming. We had supper
together and afterwards drove about Rome until dawn, and all the
time she kept telling me about her doings. I asked where Lubkov
was.


"Don't remind me of that creature!" she cried. "He is loathsome and
disgusting to me!"


"But I thought you loved him," I said.


"Never," she said. "At first he struck me as original and aroused
my pity, that was all. He is insolent and takes a woman by storm.
And that's attractive. But we won't talk about him. That is a
melancholy page in my life. He has gone to Russia to get money.
Serve him right! I told him not to dare to come back."


She was living then, not at an hotel, but in a private lodging of
two rooms which she had decorated in her own taste, frigidly and
luxuriously.


After Lubkov had gone away she had borrowed from her acquaintances
about five thousand francs, and my arrival certainly was the one
salvation for her.


I had reckoned on taking her back to the country, but I did not
succeed in that. She was homesick for her native place, but her
recollections of the poverty she had been through there, of privations,
of the rusty roof on her brother's house, roused a shudder of
disgust, and when I suggested going home to her, she squeezed my
hands convulsively and said:


"No, no, I shall die of boredom there!"


Then my love entered upon its final phase.


"Be the darling that you used to be; love me a little," said Ariadne,
bending over to me. "You're sulky and prudent, you're afraid to
yield to impulse, and keep thinking of consequences, and that's
dull. Come, I beg you, I beseech you, be nice to me! . . . My pure
one, my holy one, my dear one, I love you so!"


I became her lover. For a month anyway I was like a madman, conscious
of nothing but rapture. To hold in one's arms a young and lovely
body, with bliss to feel her warmth every time one waked up from
sleep, and to remember that she was there--she, my Ariadne!--
oh, it was not easy to get used to that! But yet I did get used to
it, and by degrees became capable of reflecting on my new position.
First of all, I realised, as before, that Ariadne did not love me.
But she wanted to be really in love, she was afraid of solitude,
and, above all, I was healthy, young, vigorous; she was sensual,
like all cold people, as a rule--and we both made a show of being
united by a passionate, mutual love. Afterwards I realised something
else, too.


We stayed in Rome, in Naples, in Florence; we went to Paris, but
there we thought it cold and went back to Italy. We introduced
ourselves everywhere as husband and wife, wealthy landowners. People
readily made our acquaintance and Ariadne had great social success
everywhere. As she took lessons in painting, she was called an
artist, and only imagine, that quite suited her, though she had not
the slightest trace of talent.


She would sleep every day till two or three o'clock; she had her
coffee and lunch in bed. At dinner she would eat soup, lobster,
fish, meat, asparagus, game, and after she had gone to bed I used
to bring up something, for instance roast beef, and she would eat
it with a melancholy, careworn expression, and if she waked in the
night she would eat apples and oranges.


The chief, so to say fundamental, characteristic of the woman was
an amazing duplicity. She was continually deceitful every minute,
apparently apart from any necessity, as it were by instinct, by an
impulse such as makes the sparrow chirrup and the cockroach waggle
its antennÃ¦. She was deceitful with me, with the footman, with the
porter, with the tradesmen in the shops, with her acquaintances;
not one conversation, not one meeting, took place without affectation
and pretence. A man had only to come into our room--whoever it
might be, a waiter, or a baron--for her eyes, her expression, her
voice to change, even the contour of her figure was transformed.
At the very first glance at her then, you would have said there
were no more wealthy and fashionable people in Italy than we. She
never met an artist or a musician without telling him all sorts of
lies about his remarkable talent.


"You have such a talent!" she would say, in honeyed cadences, "I'm
really afraid of you. I think you must see right through people."


And all this simply in order to please, to be successful, to be
fascinating! She waked up every morning with the one thought of
"pleasing"! It was the aim and object of her life. If I had told
her that in such a house, in such a street, there lived a man who
was not attracted by her, it would have caused her real suffering.
She wanted every day to enchant, to captivate, to drive men crazy.
The fact that I was in her power and reduced to a complete nonentity
before her charms gave her the same sort of satisfaction that
visitors used to feel in tournaments. My subjection was not enough,
and at nights, stretched out like a tigress, uncovered--she was
always too hot--she would read the letters sent her by Lubkov;
he besought her to return to Russia, vowing if she did not he would
rob or murder some one to get the money to come to her. She hated
him, but his passionate, slavish letters excited her. She had an
extraordinary opinion of her own charms; she imagined that if
somewhere, in some great assembly, men could have seen how beautifully
she was made and the colour of her skin, she would have vanquished
all Italy, the whole world. Her talk of her figure, of her skin,
offended me, and observing this, she would, when she was angry, to
vex me, say all sorts of vulgar things, taunting me. One day when
we were at the summer villa of a lady of our acquaintance, and she
lost her temper, she even went so far as to say: "If you don't leave
off boring me with your sermons, I'll undress this minute and lie
naked here on these flowers."


Often looking at her asleep, or eating, or trying to assume a naÃ¯ve
expression, I wondered why that extraordinary beauty, grace, and
intelligence had been given her by God. Could it simply be for
lolling in bed, eating and lying, lying endlessly? And was she
intelligent really? She was afraid of three candles in a row, of
the number thirteen, was terrified of spells and bad dreams. She
argued about free love and freedom in general like a bigoted old
woman, declared that Boleslav Markevitch was a better writer than
Turgenev. But she was diabolically cunning and sharp, and knew how
to seem a highly educated, advanced person in company.


Even at a good-humoured moment, she could always insult a servant
or kill an insect without a pang; she liked bull-fights, liked to
read about murders, and was angry when prisoners were acquitted.


For the life Ariadne and I were leading, we had to have a great
deal of money. My poor father sent me his pension, all the little
sums he received, borrowed for me wherever he could, and when one
day he answered me: "Non habeo," I sent him a desperate telegram
in which I besought him to mortgage the estate. A little later I
begged him to get money somehow on a second mortgage. He did this
too without a murmur and sent me every farthing. Ariadne despised
the practical side of life; all this was no concern of hers, and
when flinging away thousands of francs to satisfy her mad desires
I groaned like an old tree, she would be singing "Addio bella Napoli"
with a light heart.


Little by little I grew cold to her and began to be ashamed of our
tie. I am not fond of pregnancy and confinements, but now I sometimes
dreamed of a child who would have been at least a formal justification
of our life. That I might not be completely disgusted with myself,
I began reading and visiting museums and galleries, gave up drinking
and took to eating very little. If one keeps oneself well in hand
from morning to night, one's heart seems lighter. I began to bore
Ariadne too. The people with whom she won her triumphs were, by the
way, all of the middling sort; as before, there were no ambassadors,
there was no salon, the money did not run to it, and this mortified
her and made her sob, and she announced to me at last that perhaps
she would not be against our returning to Russia.


And here we are on our way. For the last few months she has been
zealously corresponding with her brother; she evidently has some
secret projects, but what they are--God knows! I am sick of trying
to fathom her underhand schemes! But we're going, not to the country,
but to Yalta and afterwards to the Caucasus. She can only exist now
at watering-places, and if you knew how I hate all these watering-places,
how suffocated and ashamed I am in them. If I could be in the country
now! If I could only be working now, earning my bread by the sweat
of my brow, atoning for my follies. I am conscious of a superabundance
of energy and I believe that if I were to put that energy to work
I could redeem my estate in five years. But now, as you see, there
is a complication. Here we're not abroad, but in mother Russia; we
shall have to think of lawful wedlock. Of course, all attraction
is over; there is no trace left of my old love, but, however that
may be, I am bound in honour to marry her.


----


Shamohin, excited by his story, went below with me and we continued
talking about women. It was late. It appeared that he and I were
in the same cabin.


"So far it is only in the village that woman has not fallen behind
man," said Shamohin. "There she thinks and feels just as man does,
and struggles with nature in the name of culture as zealously as
he. In the towns the woman of the bourgeois or intellectual class
has long since fallen behind, and is returning to her primitive
condition. She is half a human beast already, and, thanks to her,
a great deal of what had been won by human genius has been lost
again; the woman gradually disappears and in her place is the
primitive female. This dropping-back on the part of the educated
woman is a real danger to culture; in her retrogressive movement
she tries to drag man after her and prevents him from moving forward.
That is incontestable."


I asked: "Why generalise? Why judge of all women from Ariadne alone?
The very struggle of women for education and sexual equality, which
I look upon as a struggle for justice, precludes any hypothesis of
a retrograde movement."


But Shamohin scarcely listened to me and he smiled distrustfully.
He was a passionate, convinced misogynist, and it was impossible
to alter his convictions.


"Oh, nonsense!" he interrupted. "When once a woman sees in me, not
a man, not an equal, but a male, and her one anxiety all her life
is to attract me--that is, to take possession of me--how can
one talk of their rights? Oh, don't you believe them; they are very,
very cunning! We men make a great stir about their emancipation,
but they don't care about their emancipation at all, they only
pretend to care about it; they are horribly cunning things, horribly
cunning!"


I began to feel sleepy and weary of discussion. I turned over with
my face to the wall.


"Yes," I heard as I fell asleep--"yes, and it's our education
that's at fault, sir. In our towns, the whole education and bringing
up of women in its essence tends to develop her into the human beast
--that is, to make her attractive to the male and able to vanquish
him. Yes, indeed"--Shamohiri sighed--"little girls ought to be
taught and brought up with boys, so that they might be always
together. A woman ought to be trained so that she may be able, like
a man, to recognise when she's wrong, or she always thinks she's
in the right. Instil into a little girl from her cradle that a man
is not first of all a cavalier or a possible lover, but her neighbour,
her equal in everything. Train her to think logically, to generalise,
and do not assure her that her brain weighs less than a man's and
that therefore she can be indifferent to the sciences, to the arts,
to the tasks of culture in general. The apprentice to the shoemaker
or the house painter has a brain of smaller size than the grown-up
man too, yet he works, suffers, takes his part in the general
struggle for existence. We must give up our attitude to the
physiological aspect, too--to pregnancy and childbirth, seeing
that in the first place women don't have babies every month; secondly,
not all women have babies; and, thirdly, a normal countrywoman works
in the fields up to the day of her confinement and it does her no
harm. Then there ought to be absolute equality in everyday life.
If a man gives a lady his chair or picks up the handkerchief she
has dropped, let her repay him in the same way. I have no objection
if a girl of good family helps me to put on my coat or hands me a
glass of water--"


I heard no more, for I fell asleep.


Next morning when we were approaching Sevastopol, it was damp,
unpleasant weather; the ship rocked. Shamohin sat on deck with me,
brooding and silent. When the bell rang for tea, men with their
coat-collars turned up and ladies with pale, sleepy faces began
going below; a young and very beautiful lady, the one who had been
so angry with the Customs officers at Volotchisk, stopped before
Shamohin and said with the expression of a naughty, fretful child:


"Jean, your birdie's been sea-sick."


Afterwards when I was at Yalta I saw the same beautiful lady dashing
about on horseback with a couple of officers hardly able to keep
up with her. And one morning I saw her in an overall and a Phrygian
cap, sketching on the sea-front with a great crowd admiring her a
little way off. I too was introduced to her. She pressed my hand
with great warmth, and looking at me ecstatically, thanked me in
honeyed cadences for the pleasure I had given her by my writings.


"Don't you believe her," Shamohin whispered to me, "she has never
read a word of them."


When I was walking on the sea-front in the early evening Shamohin
met me with his arms full of big parcels of fruits and dainties.


"Prince Maktuev is here!" he said joyfully. "He came yesterday with
her brother, the spiritualist! Now I understand what she was writing
to him about! Oh, Lord!" he went on, gazing up to heaven, and
pressing his parcels to his bosom. "If she hits it off with the
prince, it means freedom, then I can go back to the country with
my father!"


And he ran on.


"I begin to believe in spirits," he called to me, looking back.
"The spirit of grandfather Ilarion seems to have prophesied the
truth! Oh, if only it is so!"


----


The day after this meeting I left Yalta and how Shamohin's story
ended I don't know.




POLINKA


IT is one o'clock in the afternoon. Shopping is at its height at
the "NouveautÃ©'s de Paris," a drapery establishment in one of the
Arcades. There is a monotonous hum of shopmen's voices, the hum one
hears at school when the teacher sets the boys to learn something
by heart. This regular sound is not interrupted by the laughter of
lady customers nor the slam of the glass door, nor the scurrying
of the boys.


Polinka, a thin fair little person whose mother is the head of a
dressmaking establishment, is standing in the middle of the shop
looking about for some one. A dark-browed boy runs up to her and
asks, looking at her very gravely:


"What is your pleasure, madam?"


"Nikolay Timofeitch always takes my order," answers Polinka.


Nikolay Timofeitch, a graceful dark young man, fashionably dressed,
with frizzled hair and a big pin in his cravat, has already cleared
a place on the counter and is craning forward, looking at Polinka
with a smile.


"Morning, Pelagea Sergeevna!" he cries in a pleasant, hearty baritone
voice. "What can I do for you?"


"Good-morning!" says Polinka, going up to him. "You see, I'm back
again. . . . Show me some gimp, please."


"Gimp--for what purpose?"


"For a bodice trimming--to trim a whole dress, in fact."


"Certainly."


Nickolay Timofeitch lays several kinds of gimp before Polinka; she
looks at the trimmings languidly and begins bargaining over them.


"Oh, come, a rouble's not dear," says the shopman persuasively,
with a condescending smile. "It's a French trimming, pure silk. . . .
We have a commoner sort, if you like, heavier. That's forty-five
kopecks a yard; of course, it's nothing like the same quality."


"I want a bead corselet, too, with gimp buttons," says Polinka,
bending over the gimp and sighing for some reason. "And have you
any bead motifs to match?"


"Yes."


Polinka bends still lower over the counter and asks softly:


"And why did you leave us so early on Thursday, Nikolay Timofeitch?"


"Hm! It's queer you noticed it," says the shopman, with a smirk.
"You were so taken up with that fine student that . . . it's queer
you noticed it!"


Polinka flushes crimson and remains mute. With a nervous quiver in
his fingers the shopman closes the boxes, and for no sort of object
piles them one on the top of another. A moment of silence follows.


"I want some bead lace, too," says Polinka, lifting her eyes guiltily
to the shopman.


"What sort? Black or coloured? Bead lace on tulle is the most
fashionable trimming."


"And how much is it?"


"The black's from eighty kopecks and the coloured from two and a
half roubles. I shall never come and see you again," Nikolay
Timofeitch adds in an undertone.


"Why?"


"Why? It's very simple. You must understand that yourself. Why
should I distress myself? It's a queer business! Do you suppose
it's a pleasure to me to see that student carrying on with you? I
see it all and I understand. Ever since autumn he's been hanging
about you and you go for a walk with him almost every day; and when
he is with you, you gaze at him as though he were an angel. You are
in love with him; there's no one to beat him in your eyes. Well,
all right, then, it's no good talking."


Polinka remains dumb and moves her finger on the counter in
embarrassment.


"I see it all," the shopman goes on. "What inducement have I to
come and see you? I've got some pride. It's not every one likes to
play gooseberry. What was it you asked for?"


"Mamma told me to get a lot of things, but I've forgotten. I want
some feather trimming too."


"What kind would you like?"


"The best, something fashionable."


"The most fashionable now are real bird feathers. If you want the
most fashionable colour, it's heliotrope or _kanak_--that is,
claret with a yellow shade in it. We have an immense choice. And
what all this affair is going to lead to, I really don't understand.
Here you are in love, and how is it to end?"


Patches of red come into Nikolay Timofeitch's face round his eyes.
He crushes the soft feather trimming in his hand and goes on
muttering:


"Do you imagine he'll marry you--is that it? You'd better drop
any such fancies. Students are forbidden to marry. And do you suppose
he comes to see you with honourable intentions? A likely idea! Why,
these fine students don't look on us as human beings . . . they
only go to see shopkeepers and dressmakers to laugh at their ignorance
and to drink. They're ashamed to drink at home and in good houses,
but with simple uneducated people like us they don't care what any
one thinks; they'd be ready to stand on their heads. Yes! Well,
which feather trimming will you take? And if he hangs about and
carries on with you, we know what he is after. . . . When he's a
doctor or a lawyer he'll remember you: 'Ah,' he'll say, 'I used to
have a pretty fair little thing! I wonder where she is now?' Even
now I bet you he boasts among his friends that he's got his eye on
a little dressmaker."


Polinka sits down and gazes pensively at the pile of white boxes.


"No, I won't take the feather trimming," she sighs. "Mamma had
better choose it for herself; I may get the wrong one. I want six
yards of fringe for an overcoat, at forty kopecks the yard. For the
same coat I want cocoa-nut buttons, perforated, so they can be sown
on firmly. . . ."


Nikolay Timofeitch wraps up the fringe and the buttons. She looks
at him guiltily and evidently expects him to go on talking, but he
remains sullenly silent while he tidies up the feather trimming.


"I mustn't forget some buttons for a dressing-gown . . ." she says
after an interval of silence, wiping her pale lips with a handkerchief.


"What kind?"


"It's for a shopkeeper's wife, so give me something rather striking."


"Yes, if it's for a shopkeeper's wife, you'd better have something
bright. Here are some buttons. A combination of colours--red,
blue, and the fashionable gold shade. Very glaring. The more refined
prefer dull black with a bright border. But I don't understand.
Can't you see for yourself? What can these . . . walks lead to?"


"I don't know," whispers Polinka, and she bends over the buttons;
"I don't know myself what's come to me, Nikolay Timofeitch."


A solid shopman with whiskers forces his way behind Nikolay
Timofeitch's back, squeezing him to the counter, and beaming with
the choicest gallantry, shouts:


"Be so kind, madam, as to step into this department. We have three
kinds of jerseys: plain, braided, and trimmed with beads! Which may
I have the pleasure of showing you?"


At the same time a stout lady passes by Polinka, pronouncing in a
rich, deep voice, almost a bass:


"They must be seamless, with the trade mark stamped in them, please."


"Pretend to be looking at the things," Nikolay Timofeitch whispers,
bending down to Polinka with a forced smile. "Dear me, you do look
pale and ill; you are quite changed. He'll throw you over, Pelagea
Sergeevna! Or if he does marry you, it won't be for love but from
hunger; he'll be tempted by your money. He'll furnish himself a
nice home with your dowry, and then be ashamed of you. He'll keep
you out of sight of his friends and visitors, because you're
uneducated. He'll call you 'my dummy of a wife.' You wouldn't know
how to behave in a doctor's or lawyer's circle. To them you're a
dressmaker, an ignorant creature."


"Nikolay Timofeitch!" somebody shouts from the other end of the
shop. "The young lady here wants three yards of ribbon with a metal
stripe. Have we any?"


Nikolay Timofeitch turns in that direction, smirks and shouts:


"Yes, we have! Ribbon with a metal stripe, ottoman with a satin
stripe, and satin with a moirÃ© stripe!"


"Oh, by the way, I mustn't forget, Olga asked me to get her a pair
of stays!" says Polinka.


"There are tears in your eyes," says Nikolay Timofeitch in dismay.
"What's that for? Come to the corset department, I'll screen you
--it looks awkward."


With a forced smile and exaggeratedly free and easy manner, the
shopman rapidly conducts Polinka to the corset department and
conceals her from the public eye behind a high pyramid of boxes.


"What sort of corset may I show you?" he asks aloud, whispering
immediately: "Wipe your eyes!"


"I want . . . I want . . . size forty-eight centimetres. Only she
wanted one, lined . . . with real whalebone . . . I must talk to
you, Nikolay Timofeitch. Come to-day!"


"Talk? What about? There's nothing to talk about."


"You are the only person who . . . cares about me, and I've no one
to talk to but you."


"These are not reed or steel, but real whalebone. . . . What is
there for us to talk about? It's no use talking. . . . You are going
for a walk with him to-day, I suppose?"


"Yes; I . . . I am."


"Then what's the use of talking? Talk won't help. . . . You are in
love, aren't you?"


"Yes . . ." Polinka whispers hesitatingly, and big tears gush from
her eyes.


"What is there to say?" mutters Nikolay Timofeitch, shrugging his
shoulders nervously and turning pale. "There's no need of talk. . . .
Wipe your eyes, that's all. I . . . I ask for nothing."


At that moment a tall, lanky shopman comes up to the pyramid of
boxes, and says to his customer:


"Let me show you some good elastic garters that do not impede the
circulation, certified by medical authority . . ."


Nikolay Timofeitch screens Polinka, and, trying to conceal her
emotion and his own, wrinkles his face into a smile and says aloud:


"There are two kinds of lace, madam: cotton and silk! Oriental,
English, Valenciennes, crochet, torchon, are cotton. And rococo,
soutache, Cambray, are silk. . . . For God's sake, wipe your eyes!
They're coming this way!"


And seeing that her tears are still gushing he goes on louder than
ever:


"Spanish, Rococo, soutache, Cambray . . . stockings, thread, cotton,
silk . . ."




ANYUTA


IN the cheapest room of a big block of furnished apartments Stepan
Klotchkov, a medical student in his third year, was walking to and
fro, zealously conning his anatomy. His mouth was dry and his
forehead perspiring from the unceasing effort to learn it by heart.


In the window, covered by patterns of frost, sat on a stool the
girl who shared his room--Anyuta, a thin little brunette of
five-and-twenty, very pale with mild grey eyes. Sitting with bent
back she was busy embroidering with red thread the collar of a man's
shirt. She was working against time. . . . The clock in the passage
struck two drowsily, yet the little room had not been put to rights
for the morning. Crumpled bed-clothes, pillows thrown about, books,
clothes, a big filthy slop-pail filled with soap-suds in which
cigarette ends were swimming, and the litter on the floor--all
seemed as though purposely jumbled together in one confusion. . . .


"The right lung consists of three parts . . ." Klotchkov repeated.
"Boundaries! Upper part on anterior wall of thorax reaches the
fourth or fifth rib, on the lateral surface, the fourth rib . . .
behind to the _spina scapulÃ¦_. . ."


Klotchkov raised his eyes to the ceiling, striving to visualise
what he had just read. Unable to form a clear picture of it, he
began feeling his upper ribs through his waistcoat.


"These ribs are like the keys of a piano," he said. "One must
familiarise oneself with them somehow, if one is not to get muddled
over them. One must study them in the skeleton and the living body
. . . . I say, Anyuta, let me pick them out."


Anyuta put down her sewing, took off her blouse, and straightened
herself up. Klotchkov sat down facing her, frowned, and began
counting her ribs.


"H'm! . . . One can't feel the first rib; it's behind the shoulder-blade
. . . . This must be the second rib. . . . Yes . . . this is the third
. . . this is the fourth. . . . H'm! . . . yes. . . . Why are you
wriggling?"


"Your fingers are cold!"


"Come, come . . . it won't kill you. Don't twist about. That must
be the third rib, then . . . this is the fourth. . . . You look
such a skinny thing, and yet one can hardly feel your ribs. That's
the second . . . that's the third. . . . Oh, this is muddling, and
one can't see it clearly. . . . I must draw it. . . . Where's my
crayon?"


Klotchkov took his crayon and drew on Anyuta's chest several parallel
lines corresponding with the ribs.


"First-rate. That's all straightforward. . . . Well, now I can sound
you. Stand up!"


Anyuta stood up and raised her chin. Klotchkov began sounding her,
and was so absorbed in this occupation that he did not notice how
Anyuta's lips, nose, and fingers turned blue with cold. Anyuta
shivered, and was afraid the student, noticing it, would leave off
drawing and sounding her, and then, perhaps, might fail in his exam.


"Now it's all clear," said Klotchkov when he had finished. "You sit
like that and don't rub off the crayon, and meanwhile I'll learn
up a little more."


And the student again began walking to and fro, repeating to himself.
Anyuta, with black stripes across her chest, looking as though she
had been tattooed, sat thinking, huddled up and shivering with cold.
She said very little as a rule; she was always silent, thinking and
thinking. . . .


In the six or seven years of her wanderings from one furnished room
to another, she had known five students like Klotchkov. Now they
had all finished their studies, had gone out into the world, and,
of course, like respectable people, had long ago forgotten her. One
of them was living in Paris, two were doctors, the fourth was an
artist, and the fifth was said to be already a professor. Klotchkov
was the sixth. . . . Soon he, too, would finish his studies and go
out into the world. There was a fine future before him, no doubt,
and Klotchkov probably would become a great man, but the present
was anything but bright; Klotchkov had no tobacco and no tea, and
there were only four lumps of sugar left. She must make haste and
finish her embroidery, take it to the woman who had ordered it, and
with the quarter rouble she would get for it, buy tea and tobacco.


"Can I come in?" asked a voice at the door.


Anyuta quickly threw a woollen shawl over her shoulders. Fetisov,
the artist, walked in.


"I have come to ask you a favour," he began, addressing Klotchkov,
and glaring like a wild beast from under the long locks that hung
over his brow. "Do me a favour; lend me your young lady just for a
couple of hours! I'm painting a picture, you see, and I can't get
on without a model."


"Oh, with pleasure," Klotchkov agreed. "Go along, Anyuta."


"The things I've had to put up with there," Anyuta murmured softly.


"Rubbish! The man's asking you for the sake of art, and not for any
sort of nonsense. Why not help him if you can?"


Anyuta began dressing.


"And what are you painting?" asked Klotchkov.


"Psyche; it's a fine subject. But it won't go, somehow. I have to
keep painting from different models. Yesterday I was painting one
with blue legs. 'Why are your legs blue?' I asked her. 'It's my
stockings stain them,' she said. And you're still grinding! Lucky
fellow! You have patience."


"Medicine's a job one can't get on with without grinding."


"H'm! . . . Excuse me, Klotchkov, but you do live like a pig! It's
awful the way you live!"


"How do you mean? I can't help it. . . . I only get twelve roubles
a month from my father, and it's hard to live decently on that."


"Yes . . . yes . . ." said the artist, frowning with an air of
disgust; "but, still, you might live better. . . . An educated man
is in duty bound to have taste, isn't he? And goodness knows what
it's like here! The bed not made, the slops, the dirt . . . yesterday's
porridge in the plates. . . Tfoo!"


"That's true," said the student in confusion; "but Anyuta has had
no time to-day to tidy up; she's been busy all the while."


When Anyuta and the artist had gone out Klotchkov lay down on the
sofa and began learning, lying down; then he accidentally dropped
asleep, and waking up an hour later, propped his head on his fists
and sank into gloomy reflection. He recalled the artist's words
that an educated man was in duty bound to have taste, and his
surroundings actually struck him now as loathsome and revolting.
He saw, as it were in his mind's eye, his own future, when he would
see his patients in his consulting-room, drink tea in a large
dining-room in the company of his wife, a real lady. And now that
slop-pail in which the cigarette ends were swimming looked incredibly
disgusting. Anyuta, too, rose before his imagination--a plain,
slovenly, pitiful figure . . . and he made up his mind to part with
her at once, at all costs.


When, on coming back from the artist's, she took off her coat, he
got up and said to her seriously:


"Look here, my good girl . . . sit down and listen. We must part!
The fact is, I don't want to live with you any longer."


Anyuta had come back from the artist's worn out and exhausted.
Standing so long as a model had made her face look thin and sunken,
and her chin sharper than ever. She said nothing in answer to the
student's words, only her lips began to tremble.


"You know we should have to part sooner or later, anyway," said the
student. "You're a nice, good girl, and not a fool; you'll
understand. . . ."


Anyuta put on her coat again, in silence wrapped up her embroidery
in paper, gathered together her needles and thread: she found the
screw of paper with the four lumps of sugar in the window, and laid
it on the table by the books.


"That's . . . your sugar . . ." she said softly, and turned away
to conceal her tears.


"Why are you crying?" asked Klotchkov.


He walked about the room in confusion, and said:


"You are a strange girl, really. . . . Why, you know we shall have
to part. We can't stay together for ever."


She had gathered together all her belongings, and turned to say
good-bye to him, and he felt sorry for her.


"Shall I let her stay on here another week?" he thought. "She really
may as well stay, and I'll tell her to go in a week;" and vexed at
his own weakness, he shouted to her roughly:


"Come, why are you standing there? If you are going, go; and if you
don't want to, take off your coat and stay! You can stay!"


Anyuta took off her coat, silently, stealthily, then blew her nose
also stealthily, sighed, and noiselessly returned to her invariable
position on her stool by the window.


The student drew his textbook to him and began again pacing from
corner to corner. "The right lung consists of three parts," he
repeated; "the upper part, on anterior wall of thorax, reaches the
fourth or fifth rib . . . ."


In the passage some one shouted at the top of his voice: "Grigory!
The samovar!"




THE TWO VOLODYAS


"LET me; I want to drive myself! I'll sit by the driver!" Sofya
Lvovna said in a loud voice. "Wait a minute, driver; I'll get up
on the box beside you."


She stood up in the sledge, and her husband, Vladimir Nikititch,
and the friend of her childhood, Vladimir Mihalovitch, held her
arms to prevent her falling. The three horses were galloping fast.


"I said you ought not to have given her brandy," Vladimir Nikititch
whispered to his companion with vexation. "What a fellow you are,
really!"


The Colonel knew by experience that in women like his wife, Sofya
Lvovna, after a little too much wine, turbulent gaiety was followed
by hysterical laughter and then tears. He was afraid that when they
got home, instead of being able to sleep, he would have to be
administering compresses and drops.


"Wo!" cried Sofya Lvovna. "I want to drive myself!"


She felt genuinely gay and triumphant. For the last two months,
ever since her wedding, she had been tortured by the thought that
she had married Colonel Yagitch from worldly motives and, as it is
said, _par dÃ©pit_; but that evening, at the restaurant, she had
suddenly become convinced that she loved him passionately. In spite
of his fifty-four years, he was so slim, agile, supple, he made
puns and hummed to the gipsies' tunes so charmingly. Really, the
older men were nowadays a thousand times more interesting than the
young. It seemed as though age and youth had changed parts. The
Colonel was two years older than her father, but could there be any
importance in that if, honestly speaking, there were infinitely
more vitality, go, and freshness in him than in herself, though she
was only twenty-three?


"Oh, my darling!" she thought. "You are wonderful!"


She had become convinced in the restaurant, too, that not a spark
of her old feeling remained. For the friend of her childhood,
Vladimir Mihalovitch, or simply Volodya, with whom only the day
before she had been madly, miserably in love, she now felt nothing
but complete indifference. All that evening he had seemed to her
spiritless, torpid, uninteresting, and insignificant, and the
_sangfroid_ with which he habitually avoided paying at restaurants
on this occasion revolted her, and she had hardly been able to
resist saying, "If you are poor, you should stay at home." The
Colonel paid for all.


Perhaps because trees, telegraph posts, and drifts of snow kept
flitting past her eyes, all sorts of disconnected ideas came rushing
into her mind. She reflected: the bill at the restaurant had been
a hundred and twenty roubles, and a hundred had gone to the gipsies,
and to-morrow she could fling away a thousand roubles if she liked;
and only two months ago, before her wedding, she had not had three
roubles of her own, and had to ask her father for every trifle.
What a change in her life!


Her thoughts were in a tangle. She recalled, how, when she was a
child of ten, Colonel Yagitch, now her husband, used to make love
to her aunt, and every one in the house said that he had ruined
her. And her aunt had, in fact, often come down to dinner with her
eyes red from crying, and was always going off somewhere; and people
used to say of her that the poor thing could find no peace anywhere.
He had been very handsome in those days, and had an extraordinary
reputation as a lady-killer. So much so that he was known all over
the town, and it was said of him that he paid a round of visits to
his adorers every day like a doctor visiting his patients. And even
now, in spite of his grey hair, his wrinkles, and his spectacles,
his thin face looked handsome, especially in profile.


Sofya Lvovna's father was an army doctor, and had at one time served
in the same regiment with Colonel Yagitch. Volodya's father was an
army doctor too, and he, too, had once been in the same regiment
as her father and Colonel Yagitch. In spite of many amatory adventures,
often very complicated and disturbing, Volodya had done splendidly
at the university, and had taken a very good degree. Now he was
specialising in foreign literature, and was said to be writing a
thesis. He lived with his father, the army doctor, in the barracks,
and had no means of his own, though he was thirty. As children Sofya
and he had lived under the same roof, though in different flats.
He often came to play with her, and they had dancing and French
lessons together. But when he grew up into a graceful, remarkably
handsome young man, she began to feel shy of him, and then fell
madly in love with him, and had loved him right up to the time when
she was married to Yagitch. He, too, had been renowned for his
success with women almost from the age of fourteen, and the ladies
who deceived their husbands on his account excused themselves by
saying that he was only a boy. Some one had told a story of him
lately that when he was a student living in lodgings so as to be
near the university, it always happened if one knocked at his door,
that one heard his footstep, and then a whispered apology: "_Pardon,
je ne suis pas setul._" Yagitch was delighted with him, and blessed
him as a worthy successor, as Derchavin blessed Pushkin; he appeared
to be fond of him. They would play billiards or picquet by the hour
together without uttering a word, if Yagitch drove out on any
expedition he always took Volodya with him, and Yagitch was the
only person Volodya initiated into the mysteries of his thesis. In
earlier days, when Yagitch was rather younger, they had often been
in the position of rivals, but they had never been jealous of one
another. In the circle in which they moved Yagitch was nicknamed
Big Volodya, and his friend Little Volodya.


Besides Big Volodya, Little Volodya, and Sofya Lvovna, there was a
fourth person in the sledge--Margarita Alexandrovna, or, as every
one called her, Rita, a cousin of Madame Yagitch--a very pale
girl over thirty, with black eyebrows and a pince-nez, who was for
ever smoking cigarettes, even in the bitterest frost, and who always
had her knees and the front of her blouse covered with cigarette
ash. She spoke through her nose, drawling every word, was of a cold
temperament, could drink any amount of wine and liquor without being
drunk, and used to tell scandalous anecdotes in a languid and
tasteless way. At home she spent her days reading thick magazines,
covering them with cigarette ash, or eating frozen apples.


"Sonia, give over fooling," she said, drawling. "It's really silly."


As they drew near the city gates they went more slowly, and began
to pass people and houses. Sofya Lvovna subsided, nestled up to her
husband, and gave herself up to her thoughts. Little Volodya sat
opposite. By now her light-hearted and cheerful thoughts were mingled
with gloomy ones. She thought that the man sitting opposite knew
that she loved him, and no doubt he believed the gossip that she
married the Colonel _par dÃ©pit_. She had never told him of her love;
she had not wanted him to know, and had done her best to hide her
feeling, but from her face she knew that he understood her perfectly
--and her pride suffered. But what was most humiliating in her
position was that, since her wedding, Volodya had suddenly begun
to pay her attention, which he had never done before, spending hours
with her, sitting silent or chattering about trifles; and even now
in the sledge, though he did not talk to her, he touched her foot
with his and pressed her hand a little. Evidently that was all he
wanted, that she should be married; and it was evident that he
despised her and that she only excited in him an interest of a
special kind as though she were an immoral and disreputable woman.
And when the feeling of triumph and love for her husband were mingled
in her soul with humiliation and wounded pride, she was overcome
by a spirit of defiance, and longed to sit on the box, to shout and
whistle to the horses.


Just as they passed the nunnery the huge hundred-ton bell rang out.
Rita crossed herself.


"Our Olga is in that nunnery," said Sofya Lvovna, and she, too,
crossed herself and shuddered.


"Why did she go into the nunnery?" said the Colonel.


"_Par dÃ©pit_," Rita answered crossly, with obvious allusion to
Sofya's marrying Yagitch. "_Par dÃ©pit_ is all the fashion nowadays.
Defiance of all the world. She was always laughing, a desperate
flirt, fond of nothing but balls and young men, and all of a sudden
off she went--to surprise every one!"


"That's not true," said Volodya, turning down the collar of his fur
coat and showing his handsome face. "It wasn't a case of _par dÃ©pit_;
it was simply horrible, if you like. Her brother Dmitri was sent
to penal servitude, and they don't know where he is now. And her
mother died of grief."


He turned up his collar again.


"Olga did well," he added in a muffled voice. "Living as an adopted
child, and with such a paragon as Sofya Lvovna,--one must take
that into consideration too!"


Sofya Lvovna heard a tone of contempt in his voice, and longed to
say something rude to him, but she said nothing. The spirit of
defiance came over her again; she stood up again and shouted in a
tearful voice:


"I want to go to the early service! Driver, back! I want to see
Olga."


They turned back. The nunnery bell had a deep note, and Sofya Lvovna
fancied there was something in it that reminded her of Olga and her
life. The other church bells began ringing too. When the driver
stopped the horses, Sofya Lvovna jumped out of the sledge and,
unescorted and alone, went quickly up to the gate.


"Make haste, please!" her husband called to her. "It's late already."


She went in at the dark gateway, then by the avenue that led from
the gate to the chief church. The snow crunched under her feet, and
the ringing was just above her head, and seemed to vibrate through
her whole being. Here was the church door, then three steps down,
and an ante-room with ikons of the saints on both sides, a fragrance
of juniper and incense, another door, and a dark figure opening it
and bowing very low. The service had not yet begun. One nun was
walking by the ikon-screen and lighting the candles on the tall
standard candlesticks, another was lighting the chandelier. Here
and there, by the columns and the side chapels, there stood black,
motionless figures. "I suppose they must remain standing as they
are now till the morning," thought Sofya Lvovna, and it seemed to
her dark, cold, and dreary--drearier than a graveyard. She looked
with a feeling of dreariness at the still, motionless figures and
suddenly felt a pang at her heart. For some reason, in one short
nun, with thin shoulders and a black kerchief on her head, she
recognised Olga, though when Olga went into the nunnery she had
been plump and had looked taller. Hesitating and extremely agitated,
Sofya Lvovna went up to the nun, and looking over her shoulder into
her face, recognised her as Olga.


"Olga!" she cried, throwing up her hands, and could not speak from
emotion. "Olga!"


The nun knew her at once; she raised her eyebrows in surprise, and
her pale, freshly washed face, and even, it seemed, the white
headcloth that she wore under her wimple, beamed with pleasure.


"What a miracle from God!" she said, and she, too, threw up her
thin, pale little hands.


Sofya Lvovna hugged her and kissed her warmly, and was afraid as
she did so that she might smell of spirits.


"We were just driving past, and we thought of you," she said,
breathing hard, as though she had been running. "Dear me! How pale
you are! I . . . I'm very glad to see you. Well, tell me how are
you? Are you dull?"


Sofya Lvovna looked round at the other nuns, and went on in a subdued
voice:


"There've been so many changes at home . . . you know, I'm married
to Colonel Yagitch. You remember him, no doubt. . . . I am very
happy with him."


"Well, thank God for that. And is your father quite well?"


"Yes, he is quite well. He often speaks of you. You must come and
see us during the holidays, Olga, won't you?"


"I will come," said Olga, and she smiled. "I'll come on the second
day."


Sofya Lvovna began crying, she did not know why, and for a minute
she shed tears in silence, then she wiped her eyes and said:


"Rita will be very sorry not to have seen you. She is with us too.
And Volodya's here. They are close to the gate. How pleased they'd
be if you'd come out and see them. Let's go out to them; the service
hasn't begun yet."


"Let us," Olga agreed. She crossed herself three times and went out
with Sofya Lvovna to the entrance.


"So you say you're happy, Sonitchka?" she asked when they came out
at the gate.


"Very."


"Well, thank God for that."


The two Volodyas, seeing the nun, got out of the sledge and greeted
her respectfully. Both were visibly touched by her pale face and
her black monastic dress, and both were pleased that she had
remembered them and come to greet them. That she might not be cold,
Sofya Lvovna wrapped her up in a rug and put one half of her fur
coat round her. Her tears had relieved and purified her heart, and
she was glad that this noisy, restless, and, in reality, impure
night should unexpectedly end so purely and serenely. And to keep
Olga by her a little longer she suggested:


"Let us take her for a drive! Get in, Olga; we'll go a little way."


The men expected the nun to refuse--saints don't dash about in
three-horse sledges; but to their surprise, she consented and got
into the sledge. And while the horses were galloping to the city
gate all were silent, and only tried to make her warm and comfortable,
and each of them was thinking of what she had been in the past and
what she was now. Her face was now passionless, inexpressive, cold,
pale, and transparent, as though there were water, not blood, in
her veins. And two or three years ago she had been plump and rosy,
talking about her suitors and laughing at every trifle.


Near the city gate the sledge turned back; when it stopped ten
minutes later near the nunnery, Olga got out of the sledge. The
bell had begun to ring more rapidly.


"The Lord save you," said Olga, and she bowed low as nuns do.


"Mind you come, Olga."


"I will, I will."


She went and quickly disappeared through the gateway. And when after
that they drove on again, Sofya Lvovna felt very sad. Every one was
silent. She felt dispirited and weak all over. That she should have
made a nun get into a sledge and drive in a company hardly sober
seemed to her now stupid, tactless, and almost sacrilegious. As the
intoxication passed off, the desire to deceive herself passed away
also. It was clear to her now that she did not love her husband,
and never could love him, and that it all had been foolishness and
nonsense. She had married him from interested motives, because, in
the words of her school friends, he was madly rich, and because she
was afraid of becoming an old maid like Rita, and because she was
sick of her father, the doctor, and wanted to annoy Volodya.


If she could have imagined when she got married, that it would be
so oppressive, so dreadful, and so hideous, she would not have
consented to the marriage for all the wealth in the world. But now
there was no setting it right. She must make up her mind to it.


They reached home. Getting into her warm, soft bed, and pulling the
bed-clothes over her, Sofya Lvovna recalled the dark church, the
smell of incense, and the figures by the columns, and she felt
frightened at the thought that these figures would be standing there
all the while she was asleep. The early service would be very, very
long; then there would be "the hours," then the mass, then the
service of the day.


"But of course there is a God--there certainly is a God; and I
shall have to die, so that sooner or later one must think of one's
soul, of eternal life, like Olga. Olga is saved now; she has settled
all questions for herself. . . . But if there is no God? Then her
life is wasted. But how is it wasted? Why is it wasted?"


And a minute later the thought came into her mind again:


"There is a God; death must come; one must think of one's soul. If
Olga were to see death before her this minute she would not be
afraid. She is prepared. And the great thing is that she has already
solved the problem of life for herself. There is a God . . . yes
. . . . But is there no other solution except going into a monastery?
To go into the monastery means to renounce life, to spoil it . . . ."


Sofya Lvovna began to feel rather frightened; she hid her head under
her pillow.


"I mustn't think about it," she whispered. "I mustn't. . . ."


Yagitch was walking about on the carpet in the next room with a
soft jingle of spurs, thinking about something. The thought occurred
to Sofya Lvovna that this man was near and dear to her only for one
reason--that his name, too, was Vladimir. She sat up in bed and
called tenderly:


"Volodya!"


"What is it?" her husband responded.


"Nothing."


She lay down again. She heard a bell, perhaps the same nunnery bell.
Again she thought of the vestibule and the dark figures, and thoughts
of God and of inevitable death strayed through her mind, and she
covered her ears that she might not hear the bell. She thought that
before old age and death there would be a long, long life before
her, and that day by day she would have to put up with being close
to a man she did not love, who had just now come into the bedroom
and was getting into bed, and would have to stifle in her heart her
hopeless love for the other young, fascinating, and, as she thought,
exceptional man. She looked at her husband and tried to say good-night
to him, but suddenly burst out crying instead. She was vexed with
herself.


"Well, now then for the music!" said Yagitch.


She was not pacified till ten o'clock in the morning. She left off
crying and trembling all over, but she began to have a splitting
headache. Yagitch was in haste to go to the late mass, and in the
next room was grumbling at his orderly, who was helping him to
dress. He came into the bedroom once with the soft jingle of his
spurs to fetch something, and then a second time wearing his
epaulettes, and his orders on his breast, limping slightly from
rheumatism; and it struck Sofya Lvovna that he looked and walked
like a bird of prey.


She heard Yagitch ring the telephone bell.


"Be so good as to put me on to the Vassilevsky barracks," he said;
and a minute later: "Vassilevsky barracks? Please ask Doctor
Salimovitch to come to the telephone . . ." And a minute later:
"With whom am I speaking? Is it you, Volodya? Delighted. Ask your
father to come to us at once, dear boy; my wife is rather shattered
after yesterday. Not at home, you say? H'm! . . . Thank you. Very
good. I shall be much obliged . . . _Merci_."


Yagitch came into the bedroom for the third time, bent down to his
wife, made the sign of the cross over her, gave her his hand to
kiss (the women who had been in love with him used to kiss his hand
and he had got into the habit of it), and saying that he should be
back to dinner, went out.


At twelve o'clock the maid came in to announce that Vladimir
Mihalovitch had arrived. Sofya Lvovna, staggering with fatigue and
headache, hurriedly put on her marvellous new lilac dressing-gown
trimmed with fur, and hastily did up her hair after a fashion. She
was conscious of an inexpressible tenderness in her heart, and was
trembling with joy and with fear that he might go away. She wanted
nothing but to look at him.


Volodya came dressed correctly for calling, in a swallow-tail coat
and white tie. When Sofya Lvovna came in he kissed her hand and
expressed his genuine regret that she was ill. Then when they had
sat down, he admired her dressing-gown.


"I was upset by seeing Olga yesterday," she said. "At first I felt
it dreadful, but now I envy her. She is like a rock that cannot be
shattered; there is no moving her. But was there no other solution
for her, Volodya? Is burying oneself alive the only solution of the
problem of life? Why, it's death, not life!"


At the thought of Olga, Volodya's face softened.


"Here, you are a clever man, Volodya," said Sofya Lvovna. "Show me
how to do what Olga has done. Of course, I am not a believer and
should not go into a nunnery, but one can do something equivalent.
Life isn't easy for me," she added after a brief pause. "Tell me
what to do. . . . Tell me something I can believe in. Tell me
something, if it's only one word."


"One word? By all means: tararaboomdeeay."


"Volodya, why do you despise me?" she asked hotly. "You talk to me
in a special, fatuous way, if you'll excuse me, not as one talks
to one's friends and women one respects. You are so good at your
work, you are fond of science; why do you never talk of it to me?
Why is it? Am I not good enough?"


Volodya frowned with annoyance and said:


"Why do you want science all of a sudden? Don't you perhaps want
constitutional government? Or sturgeon and horse-radish?"


"Very well, I am a worthless, trivial, silly woman with no convictions.
I have a mass, a mass of defects. I am neurotic, corrupt, and I
ought to be despised for it. But you, Volodya, are ten years older
than I am, and my husband is thirty years older. I've grown up
before your eyes, and if you would, you could have made anything
you liked of me--an angel. But you"--her voice quivered--
"treat me horribly. Yagitch has married me in his old age, and
you . . ."


"Come, come," said Volodya, sitting nearer her and kissing both her
hands. "Let the Schopenhauers philosophise and prove whatever they
like, while we'll kiss these little hands."


"You despise me, and if only you knew how miserable it makes me,"
she said uncertainly, knowing beforehand that he would not believe
her. "And if you only knew how I want to change, to begin another
life! I think of it with enthusiasm!" and tears of enthusiasm
actually came into her eyes. "To be good, honest, pure, not to be
lying; to have an object in life."


"Come, come, come, please don't be affected! I don't like it!" said
Volodya, and an ill-humoured expression came into his face. "Upon
my word, you might be on the stage. Let us behave like simple
people."


To prevent him from getting cross and going away, she began defending
herself, and forced herself to smile to please him; and again she
began talking of Olga, and of how she longed to solve the problem
of her life and to become something real.


"Ta-ra-ra-boomdee-ay," he hummed. "Ta-ra-ra-boom-dee-ay!"


And all at once he put his arm round her waist, while she, without
knowing what she was doing, laid her hands on his shoulders and for
a minute gazed with ecstasy, almost intoxication, at his clever,
ironical face, his brow, his eyes, his handsome beard.


"You have known that I love you for ever so long," she confessed
to him, and she blushed painfully, and felt that her lips were
twitching with shame. "I love you. Why do you torture me?"


She shut her eyes and kissed him passionately on the lips, and for
a long while, a full minute, could not take her lips away, though
she knew it was unseemly, that he might be thinking the worse of
her, that a servant might come in.


"Oh, how you torture me!" she repeated.


When half an hour later, having got all that he wanted, he was
sitting at lunch in the dining-room, she was kneeling before him,
gazing greedily into his face, and he told her that she was like a
little dog waiting for a bit of ham to be thrown to it. Then he sat
her on his knee, and dancing her up and down like a child, hummed:


"Tara-raboom-dee-ay. . . . Tara-raboom-dee-ay." And when he was
getting ready to go she asked him in a passionate whisper:


"When? To-day? Where?" And held out both hands to his mouth as
though she wanted to seize his answer in them.


"To-day it will hardly be convenient," he said after a minute's
thought. "To-morrow, perhaps."


And they parted. Before dinner Sofya Lvovna went to the nunnery to
see Olga, but there she was told that Olga was reading the psalter
somewhere over the dead. From the nunnery she went to her father's
and found that he, too, was out. Then she took another sledge and
drove aimlessly about the streets till evening. And for some reason
she kept thinking of the aunt whose eyes were red with crying, and
who could find no peace anywhere.


And at night they drove out again with three horses to a restaurant
out of town and listened to the gipsies. And driving back past the
nunnery again, Sofya Lvovna thought of Olga, and she felt aghast
at the thought that for the girls and women of her class there was
no solution but to go on driving about and telling lies, or going
into a nunnery to mortify the flesh. . . . And next day she met her
lover, and again Sofya Lvovna drove about the town alone in a hired
sledge thinking about her aunt.


A week later Volodya threw her over. And after that life went on
as before, uninteresting, miserable, and sometimes even agonising.
The Colonel and Volodya spent hours playing billiards and picquet,
Rita told anecdotes in the same languid, tasteless way, and Sofya
Lvovna went about alone in hired sledges and kept begging her husband
to take her for a good drive with three horses.


Going almost every day to the nunnery, she wearied Olga, complaining
of her unbearable misery, weeping, and feeling as she did so that
she brought with her into the cell something impure, pitiful, shabby.
And Olga repeated to her mechanically as though a lesson learnt by
rote, that all this was of no consequence, that it would all pass
and God would forgive her.




THE TROUSSEAU


I HAVE seen a great many houses in my time, little and big, new and
old, built of stone and of wood, but of one house I have kept a
very vivid memory. It was, properly speaking, rather a cottage than
a house--a tiny cottage of one story, with three windows, looking
extraordinarily like a little old hunchback woman with a cap on.
Its white stucco walls, its tiled roof, and dilapidated chimney,
were all drowned in a perfect sea of green. The cottage was lost
to sight among the mulberry-trees, acacias, and poplars planted by
the grandfathers and great-grandfathers of its present occupants.
And yet it is a town house. Its wide courtyard stands in a row with
other similar green courtyards, and forms part of a street. Nothing
ever drives down that street, and very few persons are ever seen
walking through it.


The shutters of the little house are always closed; its occupants
do not care for sunlight--the light is no use to them. The windows
are never opened, for they are not fond of fresh air. People who
spend their lives in the midst of acacias, mulberries, and nettles
have no passion for nature. It is only to the summer visitor that
God has vouchsafed an eye for the beauties of nature. The rest of
mankind remain steeped in profound ignorance of the existence of
such beauties. People never prize what they have always had in
abundance. "What we have, we do not treasure," and what's more we
do not even love it.


The little house stands in an earthly paradise of green trees with
happy birds nesting in them. But inside . . . alas . . . ! In summer,
it is close and stifling within; in winter, hot as a Turkish bath,
not one breath of air, and the dreariness! . . .


The first time I visited the little house was many years ago on
business. I brought a message from the Colonel who was the owner
of the house to his wife and daughter. That first visit I remember
very distinctly. It would be impossible, indeed, to forget it.


Imagine a limp little woman of forty, gazing at you with alarm and
astonishment while you walk from the passage into the parlour. You
are a stranger, a visitor, "a young man"; that's enough to reduce
her to a state of terror and bewilderment. Though you have no dagger,
axe, or revolver in your hand, and though you smile affably, you
are met with alarm.


"Whom have I the honour and pleasure of addressing?" the little
lady asks in a trembling voice.


I introduced myself and explained why I had come. The alarm and
amazement were at once succeeded by a shrill, joyful "Ach!" and she
turned her eyes upwards to the ceiling. This "Ach!" was caught up
like an echo and repeated from the hall to the parlour, from the
parlour to the kitchen, and so on down to the cellar. Soon the whole
house was resounding with "Ach!" in various voices.


Five minutes later I was sitting on a big, soft, warm lounge in the
drawing-room listening to the "Ach!" echoing all down the street.
There was a smell of moth powder, and of goatskin shoes, a pair of
which lay on a chair beside me wrapped in a handkerchief. In the
windows were geraniums, and muslin curtains, and on the curtains
were torpid flies. On the wall hung the portrait of some bishop,
painted in oils, with the glass broken at one corner, and next to
the bishop a row of ancestors with lemon-coloured faces of a gipsy
type. On the table lay a thimble, a reel of cotton, and a half-knitted
stocking, and paper patterns and a black blouse, tacked together,
were lying on the floor. In the next room two alarmed and fluttered
old women were hurriedly picking up similar patterns and pieces of
tailor's chalk from the floor.


"You must, please, excuse us; we are dreadfully untidy," said the
little lady.


While she talked to me, she stole embarrassed glances towards the
other room where the patterns were still being picked up. The door,
too, seemed embarrassed, opening an inch or two and then shutting
again.


"What's the matter?" said the little lady, addressing the door.


_"OÃ¹ est mon cravatte lequel mon pÃ¨re m'avait envoyÃ© de Koursk?"_
asked a female voice at the door.


_"Ah, est-ce que, Marie . . . que_. . . Really, it's impossible
. . . . _Nous avons donc chez nous un homme peu connu de nous._ Ask
Lukerya."


"How well we speak French, though!" I read in the eyes of the little
lady, who was flushing with pleasure.


Soon afterwards the door opened and I saw a tall, thin girl of
nineteen, in a long muslin dress with a gilt belt from which, I
remember, hung a mother-of-pearl fan. She came in, dropped a curtsy,
and flushed crimson. Her long nose, which was slightly pitted with
smallpox, turned red first, and then the flush passed up to her
eyes and her forehead.


"My daughter," chanted the little lady, "and, Manetchka, this is a
young gentleman who has come," etc.


I was introduced, and expressed my surprise at the number of paper
patterns. Mother and daughter dropped their eyes.


"We had a fair here at Ascension," said the mother; "we always buy
materials at the fair, and then it keeps us busy with sewing till
the next year's fair comes around again. We never put things out
to be made. My husband's pay is not very ample, and we are not able
to permit ourselves luxuries. So we have to make up everything
ourselves."


"But who will ever wear such a number of things? There are only two
of you?"


"Oh . . . as though we were thinking of wearing them! They are not
to be worn; they are for the trousseau!"


"Ah, _mamam_, what are you saying?" said the daughter, and she
crimsoned again. "Our visitor might suppose it was true. I don't
intend to be married. Never!"


She said this, but at the very word "married" her eyes glowed.


Tea, biscuits, butter, and jam were brought in, followed by raspberries
and cream. At seven o'clock, we had supper, consisting of six
courses, and while we were at supper I heard a loud yawn from the
next room. I looked with surprise towards the door: it was a yawn
that could only come from a man.


"That's my husband's brother, Yegor Semyonitch," the little lady
explained, noticing my surprise. "He's been living with us for the
last year. Please excuse him; he cannot come in to see you. He is
such an unsociable person, he is shy with strangers. He is going
into a monastery. He was unfairly treated in the service, and the
disappointment has preyed on his mind."


After supper the little lady showed the vestment which Yegor
Semyonitch was embroidering with his own hands as an offering for
the Church. Manetchka threw off her shyness for a moment and showed
me the tobacco-pouch she was embroidering for her father. When I
pretended to be greatly struck by her work, she flushed crimson and
whispered something in her mother's ear. The latter beamed all over,
and invited me to go with her to the store-room. There I was shown
five large trunks, and a number of smaller trunks and boxes.


"This is her trousseau," her mother whispered; "we made it all
ourselves."


After looking at these forbidding trunks I took leave of my hospitable
hostesses. They made me promise to come and see them again some
day.


It happened that I was able to keep this promise. Seven years after
my first visit, I was sent down to the little town to give expert
evidence in a case that was being tried there.


As I entered the little house I heard the same "Ach!" echo through
it. They recognised me at once. . . . Well they might! My first
visit had been an event in their lives, and when events are few
they are long remembered.


I walked into the drawing-room: the mother, who had grown stouter
and was already getting grey, was creeping about on the floor,
cutting out some blue material. The daughter was sitting on the
sofa, embroidering.


There was the same smell of moth powder; there were the same patterns,
the same portrait with the broken glass. But yet there was a change.
Beside the portrait of the bishop hung a portrait of the Colonel,
and the ladies were in mourning. The Colonel's death had occurred
a week after his promotion to be a general.


Reminiscences began. . . . The widow shed tears.


"We have had a terrible loss," she said. "My husband, you know, is
dead. We are alone in the world now, and have no one but ourselves
to look to. Yegor Semyonitch is alive, but I have no good news to
tell of him. They would not have him in the monastery on account
of--of intoxicating beverages. And now in his disappointment he
drinks more than ever. I am thinking of going to the Marshal of
Nobility to lodge a complaint. Would you believe it, he has more
than once broken open the trunks and . . . taken Manetchka's trousseau
and given it to beggars. He has taken everything out of two of the
trunks! If he goes on like this, my Manetchka will be left without
a trousseau at all."


"What are you saying, _mamam_?" said Manetchka, embarrassed. "Our
visitor might suppose . . . there's no knowing what he might suppose
. . . . I shall never--never marry."


Manetchka cast her eyes up to the ceiling with a look of hope and
aspiration, evidently not for a moment believing what she said.


A little bald-headed masculine figure in a brown coat and goloshes
instead of boots darted like a mouse across the passage and
disappeared. "Yegor Semyonitch, I suppose," I thought.


I looked at the mother and daughter together. They both looked much
older and terribly changed. The mother's hair was silvered, but the
daughter was so faded and withered that her mother might have been
taken for her elder sister, not more than five years her senior.


"I have made up my mind to go to the Marshal," the mother said to
me, forgetting she had told me this already. "I mean to make a
complaint. Yegor Semyonitch lays his hands on everything we make,
and offers it up for the sake of his soul. My Manetchka is left
without a trousseau."


Manetchka flushed again, but this time she said nothing.


"We have to make them all over again. And God knows we are not so
well off. We are all alone in the world now."


"We are alone in the world," repeated Manetchka.


A year ago fate brought me once more to the little house.


Walking into the drawing-room, I saw the old lady. Dressed all in
black with heavy crape _pleureuses_, she was sitting on the sofa
sewing. Beside her sat the little old man in the brown coat and the
goloshes instead of boots. On seeing me, he jumped up and ran out
of the room.


In response to my greeting, the old lady smiled and said:


_"Je suis charmÃ©e de vous revoir, monsieur."_


"What are you making?" I asked, a little later.


"It's a blouse. When it's finished I shall take it to the priest's
to be put away, or else Yegor Semyonitch would carry it off. I store
everything at the priest's now," she added in a whisper.


And looking at the portrait of her daughter which stood before her
on the table, she sighed and said:


"We are all alone in the world."


And where was the daughter? Where was Manetchka? I did not ask. I
did not dare to ask the old mother dressed in her new deep mourning.
And while I was in the room, and when I got up to go, no Manetchka
came out to greet me. I did not hear her voice, nor her soft, timid
footstep. . . .


I understood, and my heart was heavy.




THE HELPMATE


"I'VE asked you not to tidy my table," said Nikolay Yevgrafitch.
"There's no finding anything when you've tidied up. Where's the
telegram? Where have you thrown it? Be so good as to look for it.
It's from Kazan, dated yesterday."


The maid--a pale, very slim girl with an indifferent expression
--found several telegrams in the basket under the table, and handed
them to the doctor without a word; but all these were telegrams
from patients. Then they looked in the drawing-room, and in Olga
Dmitrievna's room.


It was past midnight. Nikolay Yevgrafitch knew his wife would not
be home very soon, not till five o'clock at least. He did not trust
her, and when she was long away he could not sleep, was worried,
and at the same time he despised his wife, and her bed, and her
looking-glass, and her boxes of sweets, and the hyacinths, and the
lilies of the valley which were sent her every day by some one or
other, and which diffused the sickly fragrance of a florist's shop
all over the house. On such nights he became petty, ill-humoured,
irritable, and he fancied now that it was very necessary for him
to have the telegram he had received the day before from his brother,
though it contained nothing but Christmas greetings.


On the table of his wife's room under the box of stationery he found
a telegram, and glanced at it casually. It was addressed to his
wife, care of his mother-in-law, from Monte Carlo, and signed Michel
. . . . The doctor did not understand one word of it, as it was in
some foreign language, apparently English.


"Who is this Michel? Why Monte Carlo? Why directed care of her
mother?"


During the seven years of his married life he had grown used to
being suspicious, guessing, catching at clues, and it had several
times occurred to him, that his exercise at home had qualified him
to become an excellent detective. Going into his study and beginning
to reflect, he recalled at once how he had been with his wife in
Petersburg a year and a half ago, and had lunched with an old
school-fellow, a civil engineer, and how that engineer had introduced
to him and his wife a young man of two or three and twenty, called
Mihail Ivanovitch, with rather a curious short surname--Riss. Two
months later the doctor had seen the young man's photograph in his
wife's album, with an inscription in French: "In remembrance of the
present and in hope of the future." Later on he had met the young
man himself at his mother-in-law's. And that was at the time when
his wife had taken to being very often absent and coming home at
four or five o'clock in the morning, and was constantly asking him
to get her a passport for abroad, which he kept refusing to do; and
a continual feud went on in the house which made him feel ashamed
to face the servants.


Six months before, his colleagues had decided that he was going
into consumption, and advised him to throw up everything and go to
the Crimea. When she heard of this, Olga Dmitrievna affected to be
very much alarmed; she began to be affectionate to her husband, and
kept assuring him that it would be cold and dull in the Crimea, and
that he had much better go to Nice, and that she would go with him,
and there would nurse him, look after him, take care of him.


Now, he understood why his wife was so particularly anxious to go
to Nice: her Michel lived at Monte Carlo.


He took an English dictionary, and translating the words, and
guessing their meaning, by degrees he put together the following
sentence: "I drink to the health of my beloved darling, and kiss
her little foot a thousand times, and am impatiently expecting her
arrival." He pictured the pitiable, ludicrous part he would play
if he had agreed to go to Nice with his wife. He felt so mortified
that he almost shed tears and began pacing to and fro through all
the rooms of the flat in great agitation. His pride, his plebeian
fastidiousness, was revolted. Clenching his fists and scowling with
disgust, he wondered how he, the son of a village priest, brought
up in a clerical school, a plain, straightforward man, a surgeon
by profession--how could he have let himself be enslaved, have
sunk into such shameful bondage to this weak, worthless, mercenary,
low creature.


"'Little foot'!" he muttered to himself, crumpling up the telegram;
"'little foot'!"


Of the time when he fell in love and proposed to her, and the seven
years that he had been living with her, all that remained in his
memory was her long, fragrant hair, a mass of soft lace, and her
little feet, which certainly were very small, beautiful feet; and
even now it seemed as though he still had from those old embraces
the feeling of lace and silk upon his hands and face--and nothing
more. Nothing more--that is, not counting hysterics, shrieks,
reproaches, threats, and lies--brazen, treacherous lies. He
remembered how in his father's house in the village a bird would
sometimes chance to fly in from the open air into the house and
would struggle desperately against the window-panes and upset things;
so this woman from a class utterly alien to him had flown into his
life and made complete havoc of it. The best years of his life had
been spent as though in hell, his hopes for happiness shattered and
turned into a mockery, his health gone, his rooms as vulgar in their
atmosphere as a cocotte's, and of the ten thousand he earned every
year he could never save ten roubles to send his old mother in the
village, and his debts were already about fifteen thousand. It
seemed that if a band of brigands had been living in his rooms his
life would not have been so hopelessly, so irremediably ruined as
by the presence of this woman.


He began coughing and gasping for breath. He ought to have gone to
bed and got warm, but he could not. He kept walking about the rooms,
or sat down to the table, nervously fidgeting with a pencil and
scribbling mechanically on a paper.


"Trying a pen. . . . A little foot."


By five o'clock he grew weaker and threw all the blame on himself.
It seemed to him now that if Olga Dmitrievna had married some one
else who might have had a good influence over her--who knows?--
she might after all have become a good, straightforward woman. He
was a poor psychologist, and knew nothing of the female heart;
besides, he was churlish, uninteresting. . . .


"I haven't long to live now," he thought. "I am a dead man, and
ought not to stand in the way of the living. It would be strange
and stupid to insist upon one's rights now. I'll have it out with
her; let her go to the man she loves. . . . I'll give her a divorce.
I'll take the blame on myself."


Olga Dmitrievna came in at last, and she walked into the study and
sank into a chair just as she was in her white cloak, hat, and
overboots.


"The nasty, fat boy," she said with a sob, breathing hard. "It's
really dishonest; it's disgusting." She stamped. "I can't put up
with it; I can't, I can't!"


"What's the matter?" asked Nikolay Yevgrafitch, going up to her.


"That student, Azarbekov, was seeing me home, and he lost my bag,
and there was fifteen roubles in it. I borrowed it from mamma."


She was crying in a most genuine way, like a little girl, and not
only her handkerchief, but even her gloves, were wet with tears.


"It can't be helped!" said the doctor. "If he's lost it, he's lost
it, and it's no good worrying over it. Calm yourself; I want to
talk to you."


"I am not a millionaire to lose money like that. He says he'll pay
it back, but I don't believe him; he's poor . . ."


Her husband begged her to calm herself and to listen to him, but
she kept on talking of the student and of the fifteen roubles she
had lost.


"Ach! I'll give you twenty-five roubles to-morrow if you'll only
hold your tongue!" he said irritably.


"I must take off my things!" she said, crying. "I can't talk seriously
in my fur coat! How strange you are!"


He helped her off with her coat and overboots, detecting as he did
so the smell of the white wine she liked to drink with oysters (in
spite of her etherealness she ate and drank a great deal). She went
into her room and came back soon after, having changed her things
and powdered her face, though her eyes still showed traces of tears.
She sat down, retreating into her light, lacy dressing-gown, and
in the mass of billowy pink her husband could see nothing but her
hair, which she had let down, and her little foot wearing a slipper.


"What do you want to talk about?" she asked, swinging herself in a
rocking-chair.


"I happened to see this;" and he handed her the telegram.


She read it and shrugged her shoulders.


"Well?" she said, rocking herself faster. "That's the usual New
Year's greeting and nothing else. There are no secrets in it."


"You are reckoning on my not knowing English. No, I don't know it;
but I have a dictionary. That telegram is from Riss; he drinks to
the health of his beloved and sends you a thousand kisses. But let
us leave that," the doctor went on hurriedly. "I don't in the least
want to reproach you or make a scene. We've had scenes and reproaches
enough; it's time to make an end of them. . . . This is what I want
to say to you: you are free, and can live as you like."


There was a silence. She began crying quietly.


"I set you free from the necessity of lying and keeping up pretences,"
Nikolay Yevgrafitch continued. "If you love that young man, love
him; if you want to go abroad to him, go. You are young, healthy,
and I am a wreck, and haven't long to live. In short . . . you
understand me."


He was agitated and could not go on. Olga Dmitrievna, crying and
speaking in a voice of self-pity, acknowledged that she loved Riss,
and used to drive out of town with him and see him in his rooms,
and now she really did long to go abroad.


"You see, I hide nothing from you," she added, with a sigh. "My
whole soul lies open before you. And I beg you again, be generous,
get me a passport."


"I repeat, you are free."


She moved to another seat nearer him to look at the expression of
his face. She did not believe him and wanted now to understand his
secret meaning. She never did believe any one, and however generous
were their intentions, she always suspected some petty or ignoble
motive or selfish object in them. And when she looked searchingly
into his face, it seemed to him that there was a gleam of green
light in her eyes as in a cat's.


"When shall I get the passport?" she asked softly.


He suddenly had an impulse to say "Never"; but he restrained himself
and said:


"When you like."


"I shall only go for a month."


"You'll go to Riss for good. I'll get you a divorce, take the blame
on myself, and Riss can marry you."


"But I don't want a divorce!" Olga Dmitrievna retorted quickly,
with an astonished face. "I am not asking you for a divorce! Get
me a passport, that's all."


"But why don't you want the divorce?" asked the doctor, beginning
to feel irritated. "You are a strange woman. How strange you are!
If you are fond of him in earnest and he loves you too, in your
position you can do nothing better than get married. Can you really
hesitate between marriage and adultery?"


"I understand you," she said, walking away from him, and a spiteful,
vindictive expression came into her face. "I understand you perfectly.
You are sick of me, and you simply want to get rid of me, to force
this divorce on me. Thank you very much; I am not such a fool as
you think. I won't accept the divorce and I won't leave you--I
won't, I won't! To begin with, I don't want to lose my position in
society," she continued quickly, as though afraid of being prevented
from speaking. "Secondly, I am twenty-seven and Riss is only
twenty-three; he'll be tired of me in a year and throw me over. And
what's more, if you care to know, I'm not certain that my feeling
will last long . . . so there! I'm not going to leave you."


"Then I'll turn you out of the house!" shouted Nikolay Yevgrafitch,
stamping. "I shall turn you out, you vile, loathsome woman!"


"We shall see!" she said, and went out.


It was broad daylight outside, but the doctor still sat at the table
moving the pencil over the paper and writing mechanically.


"My dear Sir. . . . Little foot."


Or he walked about and stopped in the drawing-room before a photograph
taken seven years ago, soon after his marriage, and looked at it
for a long time. It was a family group: his father-in-law, his
mother-in-law, his wife Olga Dmitrievna when she was twenty, and
himself in the rÃ´le of a happy young husband. His father-in-law, a
clean-shaven, dropsical privy councillor, crafty and avaricious;
his mother-in-law, a stout lady with small predatory features like
a weasel, who loved her daughter to distraction and helped her in
everything; if her daughter were strangling some one, the mother
would not have protested, but would only have screened her with her
skirts. Olga Dmitrievna, too, had small predatory-looking features,
but more expressive and bolder than her mother's; she was not a
weasel, but a beast on a bigger scale! And Nikolay Yevgrafitch
himself in the photograph looked such a guileless soul, such a
kindly, good fellow, so open and simple-hearted; his whole face was
relaxed in the naÃ¯ve, good-natured smile of a divinity student, and
he had had the simplicity to believe that that company of beasts
of prey into which destiny had chanced to thrust him would give him
romance and happiness and all he had dreamed of when as a student
he used to sing the song "Youth is wasted, life is nought, when the
heart is cold and loveless."


And once more he asked himself in perplexity how he, the son of a
village priest, with his democratic bringing up--a plain, blunt,
straightforward man--could have so helplessly surrendered to the
power of this worthless, false, vulgar, petty creature, whose nature
was so utterly alien to him.


When at eleven o'clock he put on his coat to go to the hospital the
servant came into his study.


"What is it?" he asked.


"The mistress has got up and asks you for the twenty-five roubles
you promised her yesterday."




TALENT


AN artist called Yegor Savvitch, who was spending his summer holidays
at the house of an officer's widow, was sitting on his bed, given
up to the depression of morning. It was beginning to look like
autumn out of doors. Heavy, clumsy clouds covered the sky in thick
layers; there was a cold, piercing wind, and with a plaintive wail
the trees were all bending on one side. He could see the yellow
leaves whirling round in the air and on the earth. Farewell, summer!
This melancholy of nature is beautiful and poetical in its own way,
when it is looked at with the eyes of an artist, but Yegor Savvitch
was in no humour to see beauty. He was devoured by ennui and his
only consolation was the thought that by to-morrow he would not be
there. The bed, the chairs, the tables, the floor, were all heaped
up with cushions, crumpled bed-clothes, boxes. The floor had not
been swept, the cotton curtains had been taken down from the windows.
Next day he was moving, to town.


His landlady, the widow, was out. She had gone off somewhere to
hire horses and carts to move next day to town. Profiting by the
absence of her severe mamma, her daughter Katya, aged twenty, had
for a long time been sitting in the young man's room. Next day the
painter was going away, and she had a great deal to say to him. She
kept talking, talking, and yet she felt that she had not said a
tenth of what she wanted to say. With her eyes full of tears, she
gazed at his shaggy head, gazed at it with rapture and sadness. And
Yegor Savvitch was shaggy to a hideous extent, so that he looked
like a wild animal. His hair hung down to his shoulder-blades, his
beard grew from his neck, from his nostrils, from his ears; his
eyes were lost under his thick overhanging brows. It was all so
thick, so matted, that if a fly or a beetle had been caught in his
hair, it would never have found its way out of this enchanted
thicket. Yegor Savvitch listened to Katya, yawning. He was tired.
When Katya began whimpering, he looked severely at her from his
overhanging eyebrows, frowned, and said in a heavy, deep bass:


"I cannot marry."


"Why not?" Katya asked softly.


"Because for a painter, and in fact any man who lives for art,
marriage is out of the question. An artist must be free."


"But in what way should I hinder you, Yegor Savvitch?"


"I am not speaking of myself, I am speaking in general. . . . Famous
authors and painters have never married."


"And you, too, will be famous--I understand that perfectly. But
put yourself in my place. I am afraid of my mother. She is stern
and irritable. When she knows that you won't marry me, and that
it's all nothing . . . she'll begin to give it to me. Oh, how
wretched I am! And you haven't paid for your rooms, either! . . . ."


"Damn her! I'll pay."


Yegor Savvitch got up and began walking to and fro.


"I ought to be abroad!" he said. And the artist told her that nothing
was easier than to go abroad. One need do nothing but paint a picture
and sell it.


"Of course!" Katya assented. "Why haven't you painted one in the
summer?"


"Do you suppose I can work in a barn like this?" the artist said
ill-humouredly. "And where should I get models?"


Some one banged the door viciously in the storey below. Katya, who
was expecting her mother's return from minute to minute, jumped up
and ran away. The artist was left alone. For a long time he walked
to and fro, threading his way between the chairs and the piles of
untidy objects of all sorts. He heard the widow rattling the crockery
and loudly abusing the peasants who had asked her two roubles for
each cart. In his disgust Yegor Savvitch stopped before the cupboard
and stared for a long while, frowning at the decanter of vodka.


"Ah, blast you!" he heard the widow railing at Katya. "Damnation
take you!"


The artist drank a glass of vodka, and the dark cloud in his soul
gradually disappeared, and he felt as though all his inside was
smiling within him. He began dreaming. . . . His fancy pictured how
he would become great. He could not imagine his future works but
he could see distinctly how the papers would talk of him, how the
shops would sell his photographs, with what envy his friends would
look after him. He tried to picture himself in a magnificent
drawing-room surrounded by pretty and adoring women; but the picture
was misty, vague, as he had never in his life seen a drawing-room.
The pretty and adoring women were not a success either, for, except
Katya, he knew no adoring woman, not even one respectable girl.
People who know nothing about life usually picture life from books,
but Yegor Savvitch knew no books either. He had tried to read Gogol,
but had fallen asleep on the second page.


"It won't burn, drat the thing!" the widow bawled down below, as
she set the samovar. "Katya, give me some charcoal!"


The dreamy artist felt a longing to share his hopes and dreams with
some one. He went downstairs into the kitchen, where the stout widow
and Katya were busy about a dirty stove in the midst of charcoal
fumes from the samovar. There he sat down on a bench close to a big
pot and began:


"It's a fine thing to be an artist! I can go just where I like, do
what I like. One has not to work in an office or in the fields.
I've no superiors or officers over me. . . . I'm my own superior.
And with all that I'm doing good to humanity!"


And after dinner he composed himself for a "rest." He usually slept
till the twilight of evening. But this time soon after dinner he
felt that some one was pulling at his leg. Some one kept laughing
and shouting his name. He opened his eyes and saw his friend Ukleikin,
the landscape painter, who had been away all the summer in the
Kostroma district.


"Bah!" he cried, delighted. "What do I see?"


There followed handshakes, questions.


"Well, have you brought anything? I suppose you've knocked off
hundreds of sketches?" said Yegor Savvitch, watching Ukleikin taking
his belongings out of his trunk.


"H'm! . . . Yes. I have done something. And how are you getting on?
Have you been painting anything?"


Yegor Savvitch dived behind the bed, and crimson in the face,
extracted a canvas in a frame covered with dust and spider webs.


"See here. . . . A girl at the window after parting from her
betrothed. In three sittings. Not nearly finished yet."


The picture represented Katya faintly outlined sitting at an open
window, from which could be seen a garden and lilac distance.
Ukleikin did not like the picture.


"H'm! . . . There is air and . . . and there is expression," he
said. "There's a feeling of distance, but . . . but that bush is
screaming . . . screaming horribly!"


The decanter was brought on to the scene.


Towards evening Kostyliov, also a promising beginner, an historical
painter, came in to see Yegor Savvitch. He was a friend staying at
the next villa, and was a man of five-and-thirty. He had long hair,
and wore a blouse with a Shakespeare collar, and had a dignified
manner. Seeing the vodka, he frowned, complained of his chest, but
yielding to his friends' entreaties, drank a glass.


"I've thought of a subject, my friends," he began, getting drunk.
"I want to paint some new . . . Herod or Clepentian, or some
blackguard of that description, you understand, and to contrast
with him the idea of Christianity. On the one side Rome, you
understand, and on the other Christianity. . . . I want to represent
the spirit, you understand? The spirit!"


And the widow downstairs shouted continually:


"Katya, give me the cucumbers! Go to Sidorov's and get some kvass,
you jade!"


Like wolves in a cage, the three friends kept pacing to and fro
from one end of the room to the other. They talked without ceasing,
talked, hotly and genuinely; all three were excited, carried away.
To listen to them it would seem they had the future, fame, money,
in their hands. And it never occurred to either of them that time
was passing, that every day life was nearing its close, that they
had lived at other people's expense a great deal and nothing yet
was accomplished; that they were all bound by the inexorable law
by which of a hundred promising beginners only two or three rise
to any position and all the others draw blanks in the lottery,
perish playing the part of flesh for the cannon. . . . They were
gay and happy, and looked the future boldly in the face!


At one o'clock in the morning Kostyliov said good-bye, and smoothing
out his Shakespeare collar, went home. The landscape painter remained
to sleep at Yegor Savvitch's. Before going to bed, Yegor Savvitch
took a candle and made his way into the kitchen to get a drink of
water. In the dark, narrow passage Katya was sitting, on a box,
and, with her hands clasped on her knees, was looking upwards. A
blissful smile was straying on her pale, exhausted face, and her
eyes were beaming.


"Is that you? What are you thinking about?" Yegor Savvitch asked
her.


"I am thinking of how you'll be famous," she said in a half-whisper.
"I keep fancying how you'll become a famous man. . . . I overheard
all your talk. . . . I keep dreaming and dreaming. . . ."


Katya went off into a happy laugh, cried, and laid her hands
reverently on her idol's shoulders.




AN ARTIST'S STORY


I


IT was six or seven years ago when I was living in one of the
districts of the province of T----, on the estate of a young landowner
called Byelokurov, who used to get up very early, wear a peasant
tunic, drink beer in the evenings, and continually complain to me
that he never met with sympathy from any one. He lived in the lodge
in the garden, and I in the old seigniorial house, in a big room
with columns, where there was no furniture except a wide sofa on
which I used to sleep, and a table on which I used to lay out
patience. There was always, even in still weather, a droning noise
in the old Amos stoves, and in thunder-storms the whole house shook
and seemed to be cracking into pieces; and it was rather terrifying,
especially at night, when all the ten big windows were suddenly lit
up by lightning.


Condemned by destiny to perpetual idleness, I did absolutely nothing.
For hours together I gazed out of window at the sky, at the birds,
at the avenue, read everything that was brought me by post, slept.
Sometimes I went out of the house and wandered about till late in
the evening.


One day as I was returning home, I accidentally strayed into a place
I did not know. The sun was already sinking, and the shades of
evening lay across the flowering rye. Two rows of old, closely
planted, very tall fir-trees stood like two dense walls forming a
picturesque, gloomy avenue. I easily climbed over the fence and
walked along the avenue, slipping over the fir-needles which lay
two inches deep on the ground. It was still and dark, and only here
and there on the high tree-tops the vivid golden light quivered and
made rainbows in the spiders' webs. There was a strong, almost
stifling smell of resin. Then I turned into a long avenue of limes.
Here, too, all was desolation and age; last year's leaves rusted
mournfully under my feet and in the twilight shadows lurked between
the trees. From the old orchard on the right came the faint, reluctant
note of the golden oriole, who must have been old too. But at last
the limes ended. I walked by an old white house of two storeys with
a terrace, and there suddenly opened before me a view of a courtyard,
a large pond with a bathing-house, a group of green willows, and a
village on the further bank, with a high, narrow belfry on which
there glittered a cross reflecting the setting sun.


For a moment it breathed upon me the fascination of something near
and very familiar, as though I had seen that landscape at some time
in my childhood.


At the white stone gates which led from the yard to the fields,
old-fashioned solid gates with lions on them, were standing two
girls. One of them, the elder, a slim, pale, very handsome girl
with a perfect haystack of chestnut hair and a little obstinate
mouth, had a severe expression and scarcely took notice of me, while
the other, who was still very young, not more than seventeen or
eighteen, and was also slim and pale, with a large mouth and large
eyes, looked at me with astonishment as I passed by, said something
in English, and was overcome with embarrassment. And it seemed to
me that these two charming faces, too, had long been familiar to
me. And I returned home feeling as though I had had a delightful
dream.


One morning soon afterwards, as Byelokurov and I were walking near
the house, a carriage drove unexpectedly into the yard, rustling
over the grass, and in it was sitting one of those girls. It was
the elder one. She had come to ask for subscriptions for some
villagers whose cottages had been burnt down. Speaking with great
earnestness and precision, and not looking at us, she told us how
many houses in the village of Siyanovo had been burnt, how many
men, women, and children were left homeless, and what steps were
proposed, to begin with, by the Relief Committee, of which she was
now a member. After handing us the subscription list for our
signatures, she put it away and immediately began to take leave of
us.


"You have quite forgotten us, Pyotr Petrovitch," she said to
Byelokurov as she shook hands with him. "Do come, and if Monsieur
N. (she mentioned my name) cares to make the acquaintance of admirers
of his work, and will come and see us, mother and I will be delighted."


I bowed.


When she had gone Pyotr Petrovitch began to tell me about her. The
girl was, he said, of good family, and her name was Lidia Voltchaninov,
and the estate on which she lived with her mother and sister, like
the village on the other side of the pond, was called Shelkovka.
Her father had once held an important position in Moscow, and had
died with the rank of privy councillor. Although they had ample
means, the Voltchaninovs lived on their estate summer and winter
without going away. Lidia was a teacher in the Zemstvo school in
her own village, and received a salary of twenty-five roubles a
month. She spent nothing on herself but her salary, and was proud
of earning her own living.


"An interesting family," said Byelokurov. "Let us go over one day.
They will be delighted to see you."


One afternoon on a holiday we thought of the Voltchaninovs, and
went to Shelkovka to see them. They--the mother and two daughters
--were at home. The mother, Ekaterina Pavlovna, who at one time
had been handsome, but now, asthmatic, depressed, vague, and
over-feeble for her years, tried to entertain me with conversation
about painting. Having heard from her daughter that I might come
to Shelkovka, she had hurriedly recalled two or three of my landscapes
which she had seen in exhibitions in Moscow, and now asked what I
meant to express by them. Lidia, or as they called her Lida, talked
more to Byelokurov than to me. Earnest and unsmiling, she asked him
why he was not on the Zemstvo, and why he had not attended any of
its meetings.


"It's not right, Pyotr Petrovitch," she said reproachfully. "It's
not right. It's too bad."


"That's true, Lida--that's true," the mother assented. "It isn't
right."


"Our whole district is in the hands of Balagin," Lida went on,
addressing me. "He is the chairman of the Zemstvo Board, and he has
distributed all the posts in the district among his nephews and
sons-in-law; and he does as he likes. He ought to be opposed. The
young men ought to make a strong party, but you see what the young
men among us are like. It's a shame, Pyotr Petrovitch!"


The younger sister, Genya, was silent while they were talking of
the Zemstvo. She took no part in serious conversation. She was not
looked upon as quite grown up by her family, and, like a child, was
always called by the nickname of Misuce, because that was what she
had called her English governess when she was a child. She was all
the time looking at me with curiosity, and when I glanced at the
photographs in the album, she explained to me: "That's uncle . . .
that's god-father," moving her finger across the photograph. As she
did so she touched me with her shoulder like a child, and I had a
close view of her delicate, undeveloped chest, her slender shoulders,
her plait, and her thin little body tightly drawn in by her sash.


We played croquet and lawn tennis, we walked about the garden, drank
tea, and then sat a long time over supper. After the huge empty
room with columns, I felt, as it were, at home in this small snug
house where there were no oleographs on the walls and where the
servants were spoken to with civility. And everything seemed to me
young and pure, thanks to the presence of Lida and Misuce, and there
was an atmosphere of refinement over everything. At supper Lida
talked to Byelokurov again of the Zemstvo, of Balagin, and of school
libraries. She was an energetic, genuine girl, with convictions,
and it was interesting to listen to her, though she talked a great
deal and in a loud voice--perhaps because she was accustomed to
talking at school. On the other hand, Pyotr Petrovitch, who had
retained from his student days the habit of turning every conversation
into an argument, was tedious, flat, long-winded, and unmistakably
anxious to appear clever and advanced. Gesticulating, he upset a
sauce-boat with his sleeve, making a huge pool on the tablecloth,
but no one except me appeared to notice it.


It was dark and still as we went home.


"Good breeding is shown, not by not upsetting the sauce, but by not
noticing it when somebody else does," said Byelokurov, with a sigh.
"Yes, a splendid, intellectual family! I've dropped out of all
decent society; it's dreadful how I've dropped out of it! It's all
through work, work, work!"


He talked of how hard one had to work if one wanted to be a model
farmer. And I thought what a heavy, sluggish fellow he was! Whenever
he talked of anything serious he articulated "Er-er" with intense
effort, and worked just as he talked--slowly, always late and
behind-hand. I had little faith in his business capacity if only
from the fact that when I gave him letters to post he carried them
about in his pocket for weeks together.


"The hardest thing of all," he muttered as he walked beside me--
"the hardest thing of all is that, work as one may, one meets with
no sympathy from any one. No sympathy!"



II


I took to going to see the Voltchaninovs. As a rule I sat on the
lower step of the terrace; I was fretted by dissatisfaction with
myself; I was sorry at the thought of my life passing so rapidly
and uninterestingly, and felt as though I would like to tear out
of my breast the heart which had grown so heavy. And meanwhile I
heard talk on the terrace, the rustling of dresses, the pages of a
book being turned. I soon grew accustomed to the idea that during
the day Lida received patients, gave out books, and often went into
the village with a parasol and no hat, and in the evening talked
aloud of the Zemstvo and schools. This slim, handsome, invariably
austere girl, with her small well-cut mouth, always said dryly when
the conversation turned on serious subjects:


"That's of no interest to you."


She did not like me. She disliked me because I was a landscape
painter and did not in my pictures portray the privations of the
peasants, and that, as she fancied, I was indifferent to what she
put such faith in. I remember when I was travelling on the banks
of Lake Baikal, I met a Buriat girl on horseback, wearing a shirt
and trousers of blue Chinese canvas; I asked her if she would sell
me her pipe. While we talked she looked contemptuously at my European
face and hat, and in a moment she was bored with talking to me; she
shouted to her horse and galloped on. And in just the same way Lida
despised me as an alien. She never outwardly expressed her dislike
for me, but I felt it, and sitting on the lower step of the terrace,
I felt irritated, and said that doctoring peasants when one was not
a doctor was deceiving them, and that it was easy to be benevolent
when one had six thousand acres.


Meanwhile her sister Misuce had no cares, and spent her life in
complete idleness just as I did. When she got up in the morning she
immediately took up a book and sat down to read on the terrace in
a deep arm-chair, with her feet hardly touching the ground, or hid
herself with her book in the lime avenue, or walked out into the
fields. She spent the whole day reading, poring greedily over her
book, and only from the tired, dazed look in her eyes and the extreme
paleness of her face one could divine how this continual reading
exhausted her brain. When I arrived she would flush a little, leave
her book, and looking into my face with her big eyes, would tell
me eagerly of anything that had happened--for instance, that the
chimney had been on fire in the servants' hall, or that one of the
men had caught a huge fish in the pond. On ordinary days she usually
went about in a light blouse and a dark blue skirt. We went for
walks together, picked cherries for making jam, went out in the
boat. When she jumped up to reach a cherry or sculled in the boat,
her thin, weak arms showed through her transparent sleeves. Or I
painted a sketch, and she stood beside me watching rapturously.


One Sunday at the end of July I came to the Voltchaninovs about
nine o clock in the morning. I walked about the park, keeping a
good distance from the house, looking for white mushrooms, of which
there was a great number that summer, and noting their position so
as to come and pick them afterwards with Genya. There was a warm
breeze. I saw Genya and her mother both in light holiday dresses
coming home from church, Genya holding her hat in the wind. Afterwards
I heard them having tea on the terrace.


For a careless person like me, trying to find justification for my
perpetual idleness, these holiday mornings in our country-houses
in the summer have always had a particular charm. When the green
garden, still wet with dew, is all sparkling in the sun and looks
radiant with happiness, when there is a scent of mignonette and
oleander near the house, when the young people have just come back
from church and are having breakfast in the garden, all so charmingly
dressed and gay, and one knows that all these healthy, well-fed,
handsome people are going to do nothing the whole long day, one
wishes that all life were like that. Now, too, I had the same
thought, and walked about the garden prepared to walk about like
that, aimless and unoccupied, the whole day, the whole summer.


Genya came out with a basket; she had a look in her face as though
she knew she would find me in the garden, or had a presentiment of
it. We gathered mushrooms and talked, and when she asked a question
she walked a little ahead so as to see my face.


"A miracle happened in the village yesterday," she said. "The lame
woman Pelagea has been ill the whole year. No doctors or medicines
did her any good; but yesterday an old woman came and whispered
something over her, and her illness passed away."


"That's nothing much," I said. "You mustn't look for miracles only
among sick people and old women. Isn't health a miracle? And life
itself? Whatever is beyond understanding is a miracle."


"And aren't you afraid of what is beyond understanding?"


"No. Phenomena I don't understand I face boldly, and am not overwhelmed
by them. I am above them. Man ought to recognise himself as superior
to lions, tigers, stars, superior to everything in nature, even
what seems miraculous and is beyond his understanding, or else he
is not a man, but a mouse afraid of everything."


Genya believed that as an artist I knew a very great deal, and could
guess correctly what I did not know. She longed for me to initiate
her into the domain of the Eternal and the Beautiful--into that
higher world in which, as she imagined, I was quite at home. And
she talked to me of God, of the eternal life, of the miraculous.
And I, who could never admit that my self and my imagination would
be lost forever after death, answered: "Yes, men are immortal";
"Yes, there is eternal life in store for us." And she listened,
believed, and did not ask for proofs.


As we were going home she stopped suddenly and said:


"Our Lida is a remarkable person--isn't she? I love her very
dearly, and would be ready to give my life for her any minute. But
tell me"--Genya touched my sleeve with her finger--"tell me,
why do you always argue with her? Why are you irritated?"


"Because she is wrong."


Genya shook her head and tears came into her eyes.


"How incomprehensible that is!" she said. At that minute Lida had
just returned from somewhere, and standing with a whip in her hand,
a slim, beautiful figure in the sunlight, at the steps, she was
giving some orders to one of the men. Talking loudly, she hurriedly
received two or three sick villagers; then with a busy and anxious
face she walked about the rooms, opening one cupboard after another,
and went upstairs. It was a long time before they could find her
and call her to dinner, and she came in when we had finished our
soup. All these tiny details I remember with tenderness, and that
whole day I remember vividly, though nothing special happened. After
dinner Genya lay in a long arm-chair reading, while I sat upon the
bottom step of the terrace. We were silent. The whole sky was
overcast with clouds, and it began to spot with fine rain. It was
hot; the wind had dropped, and it seemed as though the day would
never end. Ekaterina Pavlovna came out on the terrace, looking
drowsy and carrying a fan.


"Oh, mother," said Genya, kissing her hand, "it's not good for you
to sleep in the day."


They adored each other. When one went into the garden, the other
would stand on the terrace, and, looking towards the trees, call
"Aa--oo, Genya!" or "Mother, where are you?" They always said their
prayers together, and had the same faith; and they understood each
other perfectly even when they did not speak. And their attitude
to people was the same. Ekaterina Pavlovna, too, grew quickly used
to me and fond of me, and when I did not come for two or three days,
sent to ask if I were well. She, too, gazed at my sketches with
enthusiasm, and with the same openness and readiness to chatter as
Misuce, she told me what had happened, and confided to me her
domestic secrets.


She had a perfect reverence for her elder daughter. Lida did not
care for endearments, she talked only of serious matters; she lived
her life apart, and to her mother and sister was as sacred and
enigmatic a person as the admiral, always sitting in his cabin, is
to the sailors.


"Our Lida is a remarkable person," the mother would often say.
"Isn't she?"


Now, too, while it was drizzling with rain, we talked of Lida.


"She is a remarkable girl," said her mother, and added in an
undertone, like a conspirator, looking about her timidly: "You
wouldn't easily find another like her; only, do you know, I am
beginning to be a little uneasy. The school, the dispensary, books
--all that's very good, but why go to extremes? She is three-and-twenty,
you know; it's time for her to think seriously of herself. With her
books and her dispensary she will find life has slipped by without
having noticed it. . . . She must be married."


Genya, pale from reading, with her hair disarranged, raised her
head and said as it were to herself, looking at her mother:


"Mother, everything is in God's hands."


And again she buried herself in her book.


Byelokurov came in his tunic and embroidered shirt. We played croquet
and tennis, then when it got dark, sat a long time over supper and
talked again about schools, and about Balagin, who had the whole
district under his thumb. As I went away from the Voltchaninovs
that evening, I carried away the impression of a long, long idle
day, with a melancholy consciousness that everything ends in this
world, however long it may be.


Genya saw us out to the gate, and perhaps because she had been with
me all day, from morning till night, I felt dull without her, and
that all that charming family were near and dear to me, and for the
first time that summer I had a yearning to paint.


"Tell me, why do you lead such a dreary, colourless life?" I asked
Byelokurov as I went home. "My life is dreary, difficult, and
monotonous because I am an artist, a strange person. From my earliest
days I've been wrung by envy, self-dissatisfaction, distrust in my
work. I'm always poor, I'm a wanderer, but you--you're a healthy,
normal man, a landowner, and a gentleman. Why do you live in such
an uninteresting way? Why do you get so little out of life? Why
haven't you, for instance, fallen in love with Lida or Genya?"


"You forget that I love another woman," answered Byelokurov.


He was referring to Liubov Ivanovna, the lady who shared the lodge
with him. Every day I saw this lady, very plump, rotund, and
dignified, not unlike a fat goose, walking about the garden, in the
Russian national dress and beads, always carrying a parasol; and
the servant was continually calling her in to dinner or to tea.
Three years before she had taken one of the lodges for a summer
holiday, and had settled down at Byelokurov's apparently forever.
She was ten years older than he was, and kept a sharp hand over
him, so much so that he had to ask her permission when he went out
of the house. She often sobbed in a deep masculine note, and then
I used to send word to her that if she did not leave off, I should
give up my rooms there; and she left off.


When we got home Byelokurov sat down on the sofa and frowned
thoughtfully, and I began walking up and down the room, conscious
of a soft emotion as though I were in love. I wanted to talk about
the Voltchaninovs.


"Lida could only fall in love with a member of the Zemstvo, as
devoted to schools and hospitals as she is," I said. "Oh, for the
sake of a girl like that one might not only go into the Zemstvo,
but even wear out iron shoes, like the girl in the fairy tale. And
Misuce? What a sweet creature she is, that Misuce!"


Byelokurov, drawling out "Er--er," began a long-winded disquisition
on the malady of the age--pessimism. He talked confidently, in a
tone that suggested that I was opposing him. Hundreds of miles of
desolate, monotonous, burnt-up steppe cannot induce such deep
depression as one man when he sits and talks, and one does not know
when he will go.


"It's not a question of pessimism or optimism," I said irritably;
"its simply that ninety-nine people out of a hundred have no sense."


Byelokurov took this as aimed at himself, was offended, and went
away.



III


"The prince is staying at Malozyomovo, and he asks to be remembered
to you," said Lida to her mother. She had just come in, and was
taking off her gloves. "He gave me a great deal of interesting news
. . . . He promised to raise the question of a medical relief centre
at Malozyomovo again at the provincial assembly, but he says there
is very little hope of it." And turning to me, she said: "Excuse
me, I always forget that this cannot be interesting to you."


I felt irritated.


"Why not interesting to me?" I said, shrugging my shoulders. "You
do not care to know my opinion, but I assure you the question has
great interest for me."


"Yes?"


"Yes. In my opinion a medical relief centre at Malozyomovo is quite
unnecessary."


My irritation infected her; she looked at me, screwing up her eyes,
and asked:


"What is necessary? Landscapes?"


"Landscapes are not, either. Nothing is."


She finished taking off her gloves, and opened the newspaper, which
had just been brought from the post. A minute later she said quietly,
evidently restraining herself:


"Last week Anna died in childbirth, and if there had been a medical
relief centre near, she would have lived. And I think even
landscape-painters ought to have some opinions on the subject."


"I have a very definite opinion on that subject, I assure you," I
answered; and she screened herself with the newspaper, as though
unwilling to listen to me. "To my mind, all these schools, dispensaries,
libraries, medical relief centres, under present conditions, only
serve to aggravate the bondage of the people. The peasants are
fettered by a great chain, and you do not break the chain, but only
add fresh links to it--that's my view of it."


She raised her eyes to me and smiled ironically, and I went on
trying to formulate my leading idea.


"What matters is not that Anna died in childbirth, but that all
these Annas, Mavras, Pelageas, toil from early morning till dark,
fall ill from working beyond their strength, all their lives tremble
for their sick and hungry children, all their lives are being
doctored, and in dread of death and disease, fade and grow old
early, and die in filth and stench. Their children begin the same
story over again as soon as they grow up, and so it goes on for
hundreds of years and milliards of men live worse than beasts--
in continual terror, for a mere crust of bread. The whole horror
of their position lies in their never having time to think of their
souls, of their image and semblance. Cold, hunger, animal terror,
a burden of toil, like avalanches of snow, block for them every way
to spiritual activity--that is, to what distinguishes man from
the brutes and what is the only thing which makes life worth living.
You go to their help with hospitals and schools, but you don't free
them from their fetters by that; on the contrary, you bind them in
closer bonds, as, by introducing new prejudices, you increase the
number of their wants, to say nothing of the fact that they've got
to pay the Zemstvo for drugs and books, and so toil harder than
ever."


"I am not going to argue with you," said Lida, putting down the
paper. "I've heard all that before. I will only say one thing: one
cannot sit with one's hands in one's lap. It's true that we are not
saving humanity, and perhaps we make a great many mistakes; but we
do what we can, and we are right. The highest and holiest task for
a civilised being is to serve his neighbours, and we try to serve
them as best we can. You don't like it, but one can't please every
one."


"That's true, Lida," said her mother--"that's true."


In Lida's presence she was always a little timid, and looked at her
nervously as she talked, afraid of saying something superfluous or
inopportune. And she never contradicted her, but always assented:
"That's true, Lida--that's true."


"Teaching the peasants to read and write, books of wretched precepts
and rhymes, and medical relief centres, cannot diminish either
ignorance or the death-rate, just as the light from your windows
cannot light up this huge garden," said I. "You give nothing. By
meddling in these people's lives you only create new wants in them,
and new demands on their labour."


"Ach! Good heavens! But one must do something!" said Lida with
vexation, and from her tone one could see that she thought my
arguments worthless and despised them.


"The people must be freed from hard physical labour," said I. "We
must lighten their yoke, let them have time to breathe, that they
may not spend all their lives at the stove, at the wash-tub, and
in the fields, but may also have time to think of their souls, of
God--may have time to develop their spiritual capacities. The
highest vocation of man is spiritual activity--the perpetual
search for truth and the meaning of life. Make coarse animal labour
unnecessary for them, let them feel themselves free, and then you
will see what a mockery these dispensaries and books are. Once a
man recognises his true vocation, he can only be satisfied by
religion, science, and art, and not by these trifles."


"Free them from labour?" laughed Lida. "But is that possible?"


"Yes. Take upon yourself a share of their labour. If all of us,
townspeople and country people, all without exception, would agree
to divide between us the labour which mankind spends on the
satisfaction of their physical needs, each of us would perhaps need
to work only for two or three hours a day. Imagine that we all,
rich and poor, work only for three hours a day, and the rest of our
time is free. Imagine further that in order to depend even less
upon our bodies and to labour less, we invent machines to replace
our work, we try to cut down our needs to the minimum. We would
harden ourselves and our children that they should not be afraid
of hunger and cold, and that we shouldn't be continually trembling
for their health like Anna, Mavra, and Pelagea. Imagine that we
don't doctor ourselves, don't keep dispensaries, tobacco factories,
distilleries--what a lot of free time would be left us after all!
All of us together would devote our leisure to science and art.
Just as the peasants sometimes work, the whole community together
mending the roads, so all of us, as a community, would search for
truth and the meaning of life, and I am convinced that the truth
would be discovered very quickly; man would escape from this
continual, agonising, oppressive dread of death, and even from death
itself."


"You contradict yourself, though," said Lida. "You talk about
science, and are yourself opposed to elementary education."


"Elementary education when a man has nothing to read but the signs
on public houses and sometimes books which he cannot understand--
such education has existed among us since the times of Rurik; Gogol's
Petrushka has been reading for ever so long, yet as the village was
in the days of Rurik so it has remained. What is needed is not
elementary education, but freedom for a wide development of spiritual
capacities. What are wanted are not schools, but universities."


"You are opposed to medicine, too."


"Yes. It would be necessary only for the study of diseases as natural
phenomena, and not for the cure of them. If one must cure, it should
not be diseases, but the causes of them. Remove the principal cause
--physical labour, and then there will be no disease. I don't
believe in a science that cures disease," I went on excitedly. "When
science and art are real, they aim not at temporary private ends,
but at eternal and universal--they seek for truth and the meaning
of life, they seek for God, for the soul, and when they are tied
down to the needs and evils of the day, to dispensaries and libraries,
they only complicate and hamper life. We have plenty of doctors,
chemists, lawyers, plenty of people can read and write, but we are
quite without biologists, mathematicians, philosophers, poets. The
whole of our intelligence, the whole of our spiritual energy, is
spent on satisfying temporary, passing needs. Scientific men,
writers, artists, are hard at work; thanks to them, the conveniences
of life are multiplied from day to day. Our physical demands increase,
yet truth is still a long way off, and man still remains the most
rapacious and dirty animal; everything is tending to the degeneration
of the majority of mankind, and the loss forever of all fitness for
life. In such conditions an artist's work has no meaning, and the
more talented he is, the stranger and the more unintelligible is
his position, as when one looks into it, it is evident that he is
working for the amusement of a rapacious and unclean animal, and
is supporting the existing order. And I don't care to work and I
won't work. . . . Nothing is any use; let the earth sink to perdition!"


"Misuce, go out of the room!" said Lida to her sister, apparently
thinking my words pernicious to the young girl.


Genya looked mournfully at her mother and sister, and went out of
the room.


"These are the charming things people say when they want to justify
their indifference," said Lida. "It is easier to disapprove of
schools and hospitals, than to teach or heal."


"That's true, Lida--that's true," the mother assented.


"You threaten to give up working," said Lida. "You evidently set a
high value on your work. Let us give up arguing; we shall never
agree, since I put the most imperfect dispensary or library of which
you have just spoken so contemptuously on a higher level than any
landscape." And turning at once to her mother, she began speaking
in quite a different tone: "The prince is very much changed, and
much thinner than when he was with us last. He is being sent to
Vichy."


She told her mother about the prince in order to avoid talking to
me. Her face glowed, and to hide her feeling she bent low over the
table as though she were short-sighted, and made a show of reading
the newspaper. My presence was disagreeable to her. I said good-bye
and went home.



IV


It was quite still out of doors; the village on the further side
of the pond was already asleep; there was not a light to be seen,
and only the stars were faintly reflected in the pond. At the gate
with the lions on it Genya was standing motionless, waiting to
escort me.


"Every one is asleep in the village," I said to her, trying to make
out her face in the darkness, and I saw her mournful dark eyes fixed
upon me. "The publican and the horse-stealers are asleep, while we,
well-bred people, argue and irritate each other."


It was a melancholy August night--melancholy because there was
already a feeling of autumn; the moon was rising behind a purple
cloud, and it shed a faint light upon the road and on the dark
fields of winter corn by the sides. From time to time a star fell.
Genya walked beside me along the road, and tried not to look at the
sky, that she might not see the falling stars, which for some reason
frightened her.


"I believe you are right," she said, shivering with the damp night
air. "If people, all together, could devote themselves to spiritual
ends, they would soon know everything."


"Of course. We are higher beings, and if we were really to recognise
the whole force of human genius and lived only for higher ends, we
should in the end become like gods. But that will never be--mankind
will degenerate till no traces of genius remain."


When the gates were out of sight, Genya stopped and shook hands
with me.


"Good-night," she said, shivering; she had nothing but her blouse
over her shoulders and was shrinking with cold. "Come to-morrow."


I felt wretched at the thought of being left alone, irritated and
dissatisfied with myself and other people; and I, too, tried not
to look at the falling stars. "Stay another minute," I said to her,
"I entreat you."


I loved Genya. I must have loved her because she met me when I came
and saw me off when I went away; because she looked at me tenderly
and enthusiastically. How touchingly beautiful were her pale face,
slender neck, slender arms, her weakness, her idleness, her reading.
And intelligence? I suspected in her intelligence above the average.
I was fascinated by the breadth of her views, perhaps because they
were different from those of the stern, handsome Lida, who disliked
me. Genya liked me, because I was an artist. I had conquered her
heart by my talent, and had a passionate desire to paint for her
sake alone; and I dreamed of her as of my little queen who with me
would possess those trees, those fields, the mists, the dawn, the
exquisite and beautiful scenery in the midst of which I had felt
myself hopelessly solitary and useless.


"Stay another minute," I begged her. "I beseech you."


I took off my overcoat and put it over her chilly shoulders; afraid
of looking ugly and absurd in a man's overcoat, she laughed, threw
it off, and at that instant I put my arms round her and covered her
face, shoulders, and hands with kisses.


"Till to-morrow," she whispered, and softly, as though afraid of
breaking upon the silence of the night, she embraced me. "We have
no secrets from one another. I must tell my mother and my sister
at once. . . . It's so dreadful! Mother is all right; mother likes
you--but Lida!"


She ran to the gates.


"Good-bye!" she called.


And then for two minutes I heard her running. I did not want to go
home, and I had nothing to go for. I stood still for a little time
hesitating, and made my way slowly back, to look once more at the
house in which she lived, the sweet, simple old house, which seemed
to be watching me from the windows of its upper storey, and
understanding all about it. I walked by the terrace, sat on the
seat by the tennis ground, in the dark under the old elm-tree, and
looked from there at the house. In the windows of the top storey
where Misuce slept there appeared a bright light, which changed to
a soft green--they had covered the lamp with the shade. Shadows
began to move. . . . I was full of tenderness, peace, and satisfaction
with myself--satisfaction at having been able to be carried away
by my feelings and having fallen in love, and at the same time I
felt uncomfortable at the thought that only a few steps away from
me, in one of the rooms of that house there was Lida, who disliked
and perhaps hated me. I went on sitting there wondering whether
Genya would come out; I listened and fancied I heard voices talking
upstairs.


About an hour passed. The green light went out, and the shadows
were no longer visible. The moon was standing high above the house,
and lighting up the sleeping garden and the paths; the dahlias and
the roses in front of the house could be seen distinctly, and looked
all the same colour. It began to grow very cold. I went out of the
garden, picked up my coat on the road, and slowly sauntered home.


When next day after dinner I went to the Voltchaninovs, the glass
door into the garden was wide open. I sat down on the terrace,
expecting Genya every minute, to appear from behind the flower-beds
on the lawn, or from one of the avenues, or that I should hear her
voice from the house. Then I walked into the drawing-room, the
dining-room. There was not a soul to be seen. From the dining-room
I walked along the long corridor to the hall and back. In this
corridor there were several doors, and through one of them I heard
the voice of Lida:


"'God . . . sent . . . a crow,'" she said in a loud, emphatic
voice, probably dictating--"'God sent a crow a piece of cheese
. . . . A crow . . . a piece of cheese.' . . . Who's there?" she
called suddenly, hearing my steps.


"It's I."


"Ah! Excuse me, I cannot come out to you this minute; I'm giving
Dasha her lesson."


"Is Ekaterina Pavlovna in the garden?"


"No, she went away with my sister this morning to our aunt in the
province of Penza. And in the winter they will probably go abroad,"
she added after a pause. "'God sent . . . the crow . . . a piece
. . . of cheese.' . . . Have you written it?"


I went into the hall, and stared vacantly at the pond and the
village, and the sound reached me of "A piece of cheese. . . . God
sent the crow a piece of cheese."


And I went back by the way I had come here for the first time--
first from the yard into the garden past the house, then into the
avenue of lime-trees. . . . At this point I was overtaken by a small
boy who gave me a note:


"I told my sister everything and she insists on my parting from
you," I read. "I could not wound her by disobeying. God will give
you happiness. Forgive me. If only you knew how bitterly my mother
and I are crying!"


Then there was the dark fir avenue, the broken-down fence. . . .
On the field where then the rye was in flower and the corncrakes
were calling, now there were cows and hobbled horses. On the slope
there were bright green patches of winter corn. A sober workaday
feeling came over me and I felt ashamed of all I had said at the
Voltchaninovs', and felt bored with life as I had been before. When
I got home, I packed and set off that evening for Petersburg.


----


I never saw the Voltchaninovs again. Not long ago, on my way to the
Crimea, I met Byelokurov in the train. As before, he was wearing a
jerkin and an embroidered shirt, and when I asked how he was, he
replied that, God be praised, he was well. We began talking. He had
sold his old estate and bought another smaller one, in the name of
Liubov Ivanovna. He could tell me little about the Voltchaninovs.
Lida, he said, was still living in Shelkovka and teaching in the
school; she had by degrees succeeded in gathering round her a circle
of people sympathetic to her who made a strong party, and at the
last election had turned out Balagin, who had till then had the
whole district under his thumb. About Genya he only told me that
she did not live at home, and that he did not know where she was.


I am beginning to forget the old house, and only sometimes when I
am painting or reading I suddenly, apropos of nothing, remember the
green light in the window, the sound of my footsteps as I walked
home through the fields in the night, with my heart full of love,
rubbing my hands in the cold. And still more rarely, at moments
when I am sad and depressed by loneliness, I have dim memories, and
little by little I begin to feel that she is thinking of me, too
--that she is waiting for me, and that we shall meet. . . .


Misuce, where are you?




THREE YEARS



I


IT was dark, and already lights had begun to gleam here and there
in the houses, and a pale moon was rising behind the barracks at
the end of the street. Laptev was sitting on a bench by the gate
waiting for the end of the evening service at the Church of St.
Peter and St. Paul. He was reckoning that Yulia Sergeyevna would
pass by on her way from the service, and then he would speak to
her, and perhaps spend the whole evening with her.


He had been sitting there for an hour and a half already, and all
that time his imagination had been busy picturing his Moscow rooms,
his Moscow friends, his man Pyotr, and his writing-table. He gazed
half wonderingly at the dark, motionless trees, and it seemed strange
to him that he was living now, not in his summer villa at Sokolniki,
but in a provincial town in a house by which a great herd of cattle
was driven every morning and evening, accompanied by terrible clouds
of dust and the blowing of a horn. He thought of long conversations
in which he had taken part quite lately in Moscow--conversations
in which it had been maintained that one could live without love,
that passionate love was an obsession, that finally there is no
such love, but only a physical attraction between the sexes--and
so on, in the same style; he remembered them and thought mournfully
that if he were asked now what love was, he could not have found
an answer.


The service was over, the people began to appear. Laptev strained
his eyes gazing at the dark figures. The bishop had been driven by
in his carriage, the bells had stopped ringing, and the red and
green lights in the belfry were one after another extinguished--
there had been an illumination, as it was dedication day--but the
people were still coming out, lingering, talking, and standing under
the windows. But at last Laptev heard a familiar voice, his heart
began beating violently, and he was overcome with despair on seeing
that Yulia Sergeyevna was not alone, but walking with two ladies.


"It's awful, awful!" he whispered, feeling jealous. "It's awful!"


At the corner of the lane, she stopped to say good-bye to the ladies,
and while doing so glanced at Laptev.


"I was coming to see you," he said. "I'm coming for a chat with
your father. Is he at home?"


"Most likely," she answered. "It's early for him to have gone to
the club."


There were gardens all along the lane, and a row of lime-trees
growing by the fence cast a broad patch of shadow in the moonlight,
so that the gate and the fences were completely plunged in darkness
on one side, from which came the sounds of women whispering, smothered
laughter, and someone playing softly on a balalaika. There was a
fragrance of lime-flowers and of hay. This fragrance and the murmur
of the unseen whispers worked upon Laptev. He was all at once
overwhelmed with a passionate longing to throw his arms round his
companion, to shower kisses on her face, her hands, her shoulders,
to burst into sobs, to fall at her feet and to tell her how long
he had been waiting for her. A faint scarcely perceptible scent of
incense hung about her; and that scent reminded him of the time
when he, too, believed in God and used to go to evening service,
and when he used to dream so much of pure romantic love. And it
seemed to him that, because this girl did not love him, all possibility
of the happiness he had dreamed of then was lost to him forever.


She began speaking sympathetically of the illness of his sister,
Nina Fyodorovna. Two months before his sister had undergone an
operation for cancer, and now every one was expecting a return of
the disease.


"I went to see her this morning," said Yulia Sergeyevna, "and it
seemed to me that during the last week she has, not exactly grown
thin, but has, as it were, faded."


"Yes, yes," Laptev agreed. "There's no return of the symptoms, but
every day I notice she grows weaker and weaker, and is wasting
before my eyes. I don't understand what's the matter with her."


"Oh dear! And how strong she used to be, plump and rosy!" said Yulia
Sergeyevna after a moment's silence. "Every one here used to call
her the Moscow lady. How she used to laugh! On holidays she used
to dress up like a peasant girl, and it suited her so well."


Doctor Sergey Borisovitch was at home; he was a stout, red-faced
man, wearing a long coat that reached below his knees, and looking
as though he had short legs. He was pacing up and down his study,
with his hands in his pockets, and humming to himself in an undertone,
"Ru-ru-ru-ru." His grey whiskers looked unkempt, and his hair was
unbrushed, as though he had just got out of bed. And his study with
pillows on the sofa, with stacks of papers in the corners, and with
a dirty invalid poodle lying under the table, produced the same
impression of unkemptness and untidiness as himself.


"M. Laptev wants to see you," his daughter said to him, going into
his study.


"Ru-ru-ru-ru," he hummed louder than ever, and turning into the
drawing-room, gave his hand to Laptev, and asked: "What good news
have you to tell me?"


It was dark in the drawing-room. Laptev, still standing with his
hat in his hand, began apologising for disturbing him; he asked
what was to be done to make his sister sleep at night, and why she
was growing so thin; and he was embarrassed by the thought that he
had asked those very questions at his visit that morning.


"Tell me," he said, "wouldn't it be as well to send for some
specialist on internal diseases from Moscow? What do you think of
it?"


The doctor sighed, shrugged his shoulders, and made a vague gesture
with his hands.


It was evident that he was offended. He was a very huffy man, prone
to take offence, and always ready to suspect that people did not
believe in him, that he was not recognised or properly respected,
that his patients exploited him, and that his colleagues showed him
ill-will. He was always jeering at himself, saying that fools like
him were only made for the public to ride rough-shod over them.


Yulia Sergeyevna lighted the lamp. She was tired out with the
service, and that was evident from her pale, exhausted face, and
her weary step. She wanted to rest. She sat down on the sofa, put
her hands on her lap, and sank into thought. Laptev knew that he
was ugly, and now he felt as though he were conscious of his ugliness
all over his body. He was short, thin, with ruddy cheeks, and his
hair had grown so thin that his head felt cold. In his expression
there was none of that refined simplicity which makes even rough,
ugly faces attractive; in the society of women, he was awkward,
over-talkative, affected. And now he almost despised himself for
it. He must talk that Yulia Sergeyevna might not be bored in his
company. But what about? About his sister's illness again?


And he began to talk about medicine, saying what is usually said.
He approved of hygiene, and said that he had long ago wanted to
found a night-refuge in Moscow--in fact, he had already calculated
the cost of it. According to his plan the workmen who came in the
evening to the night-refuge were to receive a supper of hot cabbage
soup with bread, a warm, dry bed with a rug, and a place for drying
their clothes and their boots.


Yulia Sergeyevna was usually silent in his presence, and in a strange
way, perhaps by the instinct of a lover, he divined her thoughts
and intentions. And now, from the fact that after the evening service
she had not gone to her room to change her dress and drink tea, he
deduced that she was going to pay some visit elsewhere.


"But I'm in no hurry with the night-refuge," he went on, speaking
with vexation and irritability, and addressing the doctor, who
looked at him, as it were, blankly and in perplexity, evidently
unable to understand what induced him to raise the question of
medicine and hygiene. "And most likely it will be a long time, too,
before I make use of our estimate. I fear our night-shelter will
fall into the hands of our pious humbugs and philanthropic ladies,
who always ruin any undertaking."


Yulia Sergeyevna got up and held out her hand to Laptev.


"Excuse me," she said, "it's time for me to go. Please give my love
to your sister."


"Ru-ru-ru-ru," hummed the doctor. "Ru-ru-ru-ru."


Yulia Sergeyevna went out, and after staying a little longer, Laptev
said good-bye to the doctor and went home. When a man is dissatisfied
and feels unhappy, how trivial seem to him the shapes of the
lime-trees, the shadows, the clouds, all the beauties of nature,
so complacent, so indifferent! By now the moon was high up in the
sky, and the clouds were scudding quickly below. "But how naÃ¯ve and
provincial the moon is, how threadbare and paltry the clouds!"
thought Laptev. He felt ashamed of the way he had talked just now
about medicine, and the night-refuge. He felt with horror that next
day he would not have will enough to resist trying to see her and
talk to her again, and would again be convinced that he was nothing
to her. And the day after--it would be the same. With what object?
And how and when would it all end?


At home he went in to see his sister. Nina Fyodorovna still looked
strong and gave the impression of being a well-built, vigorous
woman, but her striking pallor made her look like a corpse, especially
when, as now, she was lying on her back with her eyes closed; her
eldest daughter Sasha, a girl of ten years old, was sitting beside
her reading aloud from her reading-book.


"Alyosha has come," the invalid said softly to herself.


There had long been established between Sasha and her uncle a tacit
compact, to take turns in sitting with the patient. On this occasion
Sasha closed her reading-book, and without uttering a word, went
softly out of the room. Laptev took an historical novel from the
chest of drawers, and looking for the right page, sat down and began
reading it aloud.


Nina Fyodorovna was born in Moscow of a merchant family. She and
her two brothers had spent their childhood and early youth, living
at home in Pyatnitsky Street. Their childhood was long and wearisome;
her father treated her sternly, and had even on two or three occasions
flogged her, and her mother had had a long illness and died. The
servants were coarse, dirty, and hypocritical; the house was
frequented by priests and monks, also hypocritical; they ate and
drank and coarsely flattered her father, whom they did not like.
The boys had the good-fortune to go to school, while Nina was left
practically uneducated. All her life she wrote an illegible scrawl,
and had read nothing but historical novels. Seventeen years ago,
when she was twenty-two, on a summer holiday at Himki, she made the
acquaintance of her present husband, a landowner called Panaurov,
had fallen in love with him, and married him secretly against her
father's will. Panaurov, a handsome, rather impudent fellow, who
whistled and lighted his cigarette from the holy lamp, struck the
father as an absolutely worthless person. And when the son-in-law
began in his letters demanding a dowry, the old man wrote to his
daughter that he would send her furs, silver, and various articles
that had been left at her mother's death, as well as thirty thousand
roubles, but without his paternal blessing. Later he sent another
twenty thousand. This money, as well as the dowry, was spent; the
estate had been sold and Panaurov moved with his family to the town
and got a job in a provincial government office. In the town he
formed another tie, and had a second family, and this was the subject
of much talk, as his illicit family was not a secret.


Nina Fyodorovna adored her husband. And now, listening to the
historical novel, she was thinking how much she had gone through
in her life, how much she had suffered, and that if any one were
to describe her life it would make a very pathetic story. As the
tumour was in her breast, she was persuaded that love and her
domestic grief were the cause of her illness, and that jealousy and
tears had brought her to her hopeless state.


At last Alexey Fyodorovitch closed the book and said:


"That's the end, and thank God for it. To-morrow we'll begin a new
one."


Nina Fyodorovna laughed. She had always been given to laughter, but
of late Laptev had begun to notice that at moments her mind seemed
weakened by illness, and she would laugh at the smallest trifle,
and even without any cause at all.


"Yulia came before dinner while you were out," she said. "So far
as I can see, she hasn't much faith in her papa. 'Let papa go on
treating you,' she said, 'but write in secret to the holy elder to
pray for you, too.' There is a holy man somewhere here. Yulia forgot
her parasol here; you must take it to her to-morrow," she went on
after a brief pause. "No, when the end comes, neither doctors nor
holy men are any help."


"Nina, why can't you sleep at night?" Laptev asked, to change the
subject.


"Oh, well, I don't go to sleep--that's all. I lie and think."


"What do you think about, dear?"


"About the children, about you . . . about my life. I've gone through
a great deal, Alyosha, you know. When one begins to remember and
remember. . . . My God!" She laughed. "It's no joke to have borne
five children as I have, to have buried three. . . Sometimes I was
expecting to be confined while my Grigory Nikolaitch would be sitting
at that very time with another woman. There would be no one to send
for the doctor or the midwife. I would go into the passage or the
kitchen for the servant, and there Jews, tradesmen, moneylenders,
would be waiting for him to come home. My head used to go round
. . . . He did not love me, though he never said so openly. Now I've
grown calmer--it doesn't weigh on my heart; but in old days, when
I was younger, it hurt me--ach! how it hurt me, darling! Once--
while we were still in the country--I found him in the garden
with a lady, and I walked away. . . I walked on aimlessly, and I
don't know how, but I found myself in the church porch. I fell on
my knees: 'Queen of Heaven!' I said. And it was night, the moon was
shining. . . ."


She was exhausted, she began gasping for breath. Then, after resting
a little, she took her brother's hand and went on in a weak, toneless
voice:


"How kind you are, Alyosha! . . . And how clever! . . . What a good
man you've grown up into!"


At midnight Laptev said good-night to her, and as he went away he
took with him the parasol that Yulia Sergeyevna had forgotten. In
spite of the late hour, the servants, male and female, were drinking
tea in the dining-room. How disorderly! The children were not in
bed, but were there in the dining-room, too. They were all talking
softly in undertones, and had not noticed that the lamp was smoking
and would soon go out. All these people, big and little, were
disturbed by a whole succession of bad omens and were in an oppressed
mood. The glass in the hall had been broken, the samovar had been
buzzing every day, and, as though on purpose, was even buzzing now.
They were describing how a mouse had jumped out of Nina Fyodorovna's
boot when she was dressing. And the children were quite aware of
the terrible significance of these omens. The elder girl, Sasha, a
thin little brunette, was sitting motionless at the table, and her
face looked scared and woebegone, while the younger, Lida, a chubby
fair child of seven, stood beside her sister looking from under her
brows at the light.


Laptev went downstairs to his own rooms in the lower storey, where
under the low ceilings it was always close and smelt of geraniums.
In his sitting-room, Panaurov, Nina Fyodorovna's husband, was sitting
reading the newspaper. Laptev nodded to him and sat down opposite.
Both sat still and said nothing. They used to spend whole evenings
like this without speaking, and neither of them was in the least
put out by this silence.


The little girls came down from upstairs to say good-night.
Deliberately and in silence, Panaurov made the sign of the cross
over them several times, and gave them his hand to kiss. They dropped
curtsies, and then went up to Laptev, who had to make the sign of
the cross and give them his hand to kiss also. This ceremony with
the hand-kissing and curtsying was repeated every evening.


When the children had gone out Panaurov laid aside the newspaper
and said:


"It's not very lively in our God-fearing town! I must confess, my
dear fellow," he added with a sigh, "I'm very glad that at last
you've found some distraction."


"What do you mean?" asked Laptev.


"I saw you coming out of Dr. Byelavin's just now. I expect you don't
go there for the sake of the papa."


"Of course not," said Laptev, and he blushed.


"Well, of course not. And by the way, you wouldn't find such another
old brute as that papa if you hunted by daylight with a candle. You
can't imagine what a foul, stupid, clumsy beast he is! You cultured
people in the capitals are still interested in the provinces only
on the lyrical side, only from the _paysage_ and _Poor Anton_ point
of view, but I can assure you, my boy, there's nothing logical about
it; there's nothing but barbarism, meanness, and nastiness--that's
all. Take the local devotees of science--the local intellectuals,
so to speak. Can you imagine there are here in this town twenty-eight
doctors? They've all made their fortunes, and they are living in
houses of their own, and meanwhile the population is in just as
helpless a condition as ever. Here, Nina had to have an operation,
quite an ordinary one really, yet we were obliged to get a surgeon
from Moscow; not one doctor here would undertake it. It's beyond
all conception. They know nothing, they understand nothing. They
take no interest in anything. Ask them, for instance, what cancer
is--what it is, what it comes from."


And Panaurov began to explain what cancer was. He was a specialist
on all scientific subjects, and explained from a scientific point
of view everything that was discussed. But he explained it all in
his own way. He had a theory of his own about the circulation of
the blood, about chemistry, about astronomy. He talked slowly,
softly, convincingly.


"It's beyond all conception," he pronounced in an imploring voice,
screwing up his eyes, sighing languidly, and smiling as graciously
as a king, and it was evident that he was very well satisfied with
himself, and never gave a thought to the fact that he was fifty.


"I am rather hungry," said Laptev. "I should like something savoury."


"Well, that can easily be managed."


Not long afterwards Laptev and his brother-in-law were sitting
upstairs in the dining-room having supper. Laptev had a glass of
vodka, and then began drinking wine. Panaurov drank nothing. He
never drank, and never gambled, yet in spite of that he had squandered
all his own and his wife's property, and had accumulated debts. To
squander so much in such a short time, one must have, not passions,
but a special talent. Panaurov liked dainty fare, liked a handsome
dinner service, liked music after dinner, speeches, bowing footmen,
to whom he would carelessly fling tips of ten, even twenty-five
roubles. He always took part in all lotteries and subscriptions,
sent bouquets to ladies of his acquaintance on their birthdays,
bought cups, stands for glasses, studs, ties, walking-sticks, scents,
cigarette-holders, pipes, lap-dogs, parrots, Japanese bric-Ã -brac,
antiques; he had silk nightshirts, and a bedstead made of ebony
inlaid with mother-of-pearl. His dressing-gown was a genuine Bokhara,
and everything was to correspond; and on all this there went every
day, as he himself expressed, "a deluge" of money.


At supper he kept sighing and shaking his head.


"Yes, everything on this earth has an end," he said softly, screwing
up his dark eyes. "You will fall in love and suffer. You will fall
out of love; you'll be deceived, for there is no woman who will not
deceive; you will suffer, will be brought to despair, and will be
faithless too. But the time will come when all this will be a memory,
and when you will reason about it coldly and look upon it as utterly
trivial. . . ."


Laptev, tired, a little drunk, looked at his handsome head, his
clipped black beard, and seemed to understand why women so loved
this pampered, conceited, and physically handsome creature.


After supper Panaurov did not stay in the house, but went off to
his other lodgings. Laptev went out to see him on his way. Panaurov
was the only man in the town who wore a top-hat, and his elegant,
dandified figure, his top-hat and tan gloves, beside the grey fences,
the pitiful little houses, with their three windows and the thickets
of nettles, always made a strange and mournful impression.


After saying good-bye to him Laptev returned home without hurrying.
The moon was shining brightly; one could distinguish every straw
on the ground, and Laptev felt as though the moonlight were caressing
his bare head, as though some one were passing a feather over his
hair.


"I love!" he pronounced aloud, and he had a sudden longing to run
to overtake Panaurov, to embrace him, to forgive him, to make him
a present of a lot of money, and then to run off into the open
country, into a wood, to run on and on without looking back.


At home he saw lying on the chair the parasol Yulia Sergeyevna had
forgotten; he snatched it up and kissed it greedily. The parasol
was a silk one, no longer new, tied round with old elastic. The
handle was a cheap one, of white bone. Laptev opened it over him,
and he felt as though there were the fragrance of happiness about
him.


He settled himself more comfortably in his chair, and still keeping
hold of the parasol, began writing to Moscow to one of his friends:


"DEAR PRECIOUS KOSTYA,


"Here is news for you: I'm in love again! I say _again_, because
six years ago I fell in love with a Moscow actress, though I didn't
even succeed in making her acquaintance, and for the last year and
a half I have been living with a certain person you know--a woman
neither young nor good-looking. Ah, my dear boy, how unlucky I am
in love. I've never had any success with women, and if I say _again_
it's simply because it's rather sad and mortifying to acknowledge
even to myself that my youth has passed entirely without love, and
that I'm in love in a real sense now for the first time in my life,
at thirty-four. Let it stand that I love _again_.


"If only you knew what a girl she was! She couldn't be called a
beauty--she has a broad face, she is very thin, but what a wonderful
expression of goodness she has when she smiles! When she speaks,
her voice is as clear as a bell. She never carries on a conversation
with me--I don't know her; but when I'm beside her I feel she's
a striking, exceptional creature, full of intelligence and lofty
aspirations. She is religious, and you cannot imagine how deeply
this touches me and exalts her in my eyes. On that point I am ready
to argue with you endlessly. You may be right, to your thinking;
but, still, I love to see her praying in church. She is a provincial,
but she was educated in Moscow. She loves our Moscow; she dresses
in the Moscow style, and I love her for that--love her, love her
. . . . I see you frowning and getting up to read me a long lecture
on what love is, and what sort of woman one can love, and what sort
one cannot, and so on, and so on. But, dear Kostya, before I was
in love I, too, knew quite well what love was.


"My sister thanks you for your message. She often recalls how she
used to take Kostya Kotchevoy to the preparatory class, and never
speaks of you except as _poor Kostya_, as she still thinks of you
as the little orphan boy she remembers. And so, poor orphan, I'm
in love. While it's a secret, don't say anything to a 'certain
person.' I think it will all come right of itself, or, as the footman
says in Tolstoy, will 'come round.'"


When he had finished his letter Laptev went to bed. He was so tired
that he couldn't keep his eyes open, but for some reason he could
not get to sleep; the noise in the street seemed to prevent him.
The cattle were driven by to the blowing of a horn, and soon
afterwards the bells began ringing for early mass. At one minute a
cart drove by creaking; at the next, he heard the voice of some
woman going to market. And the sparrows twittered the whole time.



II


The next morning was a cheerful one; it was a holiday. At ten o'clock
Nina Fyodorovna, wearing a brown dress and with her hair neatly
arranged, was led into the drawing-room, supported on each side.
There she walked about a little and stood by the open window, and
her smile was broad and naÃ¯ve, and, looking at her, one recalled a
local artist, a great drunkard, who wanted her to sit to him for a
picture of the Russian carnival. And all of them--the children,
the servants, her brother, Alexey Fyodorovitch, and she herself--
were suddenly convinced, that she was certainly going to get well.
With shrieks of laughter the children ran after their uncle, chasing
him and catching him, and filling the house with noise.


People called to ask how she was, brought her holy bread, told her
that in almost all the churches they were offering up prayers for
her that day. She had been conspicuous for her benevolence in the
town, and was liked. She was very ready with her charity, like her
brother Alexey, who gave away his money freely, without considering
whether it was necessary to give it or not. Nina Fyodorovna used
to pay the school fees for poor children; used to give away tea,
sugar, and jam to old women; used to provide trousseaux for poor
brides; and if she picked up a newspaper, she always looked first
of all to see if there were any appeals for charity or a paragraph
about somebody's being in a destitute condition.


She was holding now in her hand a bundle of notes, by means of which
various poor people, her protÃ©gÃ©s, had procured goods from a grocer's
shop.


They had been sent her the evening before by the shopkeeper with a
request for the payment of the total--eighty-two roubles.


"My goodness, what a lot they've had! They've no conscience!" she
said, deciphering with difficulty her ugly handwriting. "It's no
joke! Eighty-two roubles! I declare I won't pay it."


"I'll pay it to-day," said Laptev.


"Why should you? Why should you?" cried Nina Fyodorovna in agitation.
"It's quite enough for me to take two hundred and fifty every month
from you and our brother. God bless you!" she added, speaking softly,
so as not to be overheard by the servants.


"Well, but I spend two thousand five hundred a month," he said. "I
tell you again, dear: you have just as much right to spend it as I
or Fyodor. Do understand that, once for all. There are three of us,
and of every three kopecks of our father's money, one belongs to
you."


But Nina Fyodorovna did not understand, and her expression looked
as though she were mentally solving some very difficult problem.
And this lack of comprehension in pecuniary matters, always made
Laptev feel uneasy and troubled. He suspected that she had private
debts in addition which worried her and of which she scrupled to
tell him.


Then came the sound of footsteps and heavy breathing; it was the
doctor coming up the stairs, dishevelled and unkempt as usual.


"Ru-ru-ru," he was humming. "Ru-ru."


To avoid meeting him, Laptev went into the dining-room, and then
went downstairs to his own room. It was clear to him that to get
on with the doctor and to drop in at his house without formalities
was impossible; and to meet the "old brute," as Panaurov called
him, was distasteful. That was why he so rarely saw Yulia. He
reflected now that the father was not at home, that if he were to
take Yulia Sergeyevna her parasol, he would be sure to find her at
home alone, and his heart ached with joy. Haste, haste!


He took the parasol and, violently agitated, flew on the wings of
love. It was hot in the street. In the big courtyard of the doctor's
house, overgrown with coarse grass and nettles, some twenty urchins
were playing ball. These were all the children of working-class
families who tenanted the three disreputable-looking lodges, which
the doctor was always meaning to have done up, though he put it off
from year to year. The yard resounded with ringing, healthy voices.
At some distance on one side, Yulia Sergeyevna was standing at her
porch, her hands folded, watching the game.


"Good-morning!" Laptev called to her.


She looked round. Usually he saw her indifferent, cold, or tired
as she had been the evening before. Now her face looked full of
life and frolic, like the faces of the boys who were playing ball.


"Look, they never play so merrily in Moscow," she said, going to
meet him. "There are no such big yards there, though; they've no
place to run there. Papa has only just gone to you," she added,
looking round at the children.


"I know; but I've not come to see him, but to see you," said Laptev,
admiring her youthfulness, which he had not noticed till then, and
seemed only that day to have discovered in her; it seemed to him
as though he were seeing her slender white neck with the gold chain
for the first time. "I've come to see you . . ." he repeated. "My
sister has sent you your parasol; you forgot it yesterday."


She put out her hand to take the parasol, but he pressed it to his
bosom and spoke passionately, without restraint, yielding again to
the sweet ecstasy he had felt the night before, sitting under the
parasol.


"I entreat you, give it me. I shall keep it in memory of you . . .
of our acquaintance. It's so wonderful!"


"Take it," she said, and blushed; "but there's nothing wonderful
about it."


He looked at her in ecstasy, in silence, not knowing what to say.


"Why am I keeping you here in the heat?" she said after a brief
pause, laughing. "Let us go indoors."


"I am not disturbing you?"


They went into the hall. Yulia Sergeyevna ran upstairs, her white
dress with blue flowers on it rustling as she went.


"I can't be disturbed," she answered, stopping on the landing. "I
never do anything. Every day is a holiday for me, from morning till
night."


"What you say is inconceivable to me," he said, going up to her.
"I grew up in a world in which every one without exception, men and
women alike, worked hard every day."


"But if one has nothing to do?" she asked.


"One has to arrange one's life under such conditions, that work is
inevitable. There can be no clean and happy life without work."


Again he pressed the parasol to his bosom, and to his own surprise
spoke softly, in a voice unlike his own:


"If you would consent to be my wife I would give everything--I
would give everything. There's no price I would not pay, no sacrifice
I would not make."


She started and looked at him with wonder and alarm.


"What are you saying!" she brought out, turning pale. "It's impossible,
I assure you. Forgive me."


Then with the same rustle of her skirts she went up higher, and
vanished through the doorway.


Laptev grasped what this meant, and his mood was transformed,
completely, abruptly, as though a light in his soul had suddenly
been extinguished. Filled with the shame of a man humiliated, of a
man who is disdained, who is not liked, who is distasteful, perhaps
disgusting, who is shunned, he walked out of the house.


"I would give everything," he thought, mimicking himself as he went
home through the heat and recalled the details of his declaration.
"I would give everything--like a regular tradesman. As though she
wanted your _everything_!"


All he had just said seemed to him repulsively stupid. Why had he
lied, saying that he had grown up in a world where every one worked,
without exception? Why had he talked to her in a lecturing tone
about a clean and happy life? It was not clever, not interesting;
it was false--false in the Moscow style. But by degrees there
followed that mood of indifference into which criminals sink after
a severe sentence. He began thinking that, thank God! everything
was at an end and that the terrible uncertainty was over; that now
there was no need to spend whole days in anticipation, in pining,
in thinking always of the same thing. Now everything was clear; he
must give up all hope of personal happiness, live without desires,
without hopes, without dreams, or expectations, and to escape that
dreary sadness which he was so sick of trying to soothe, he could
busy himself with other people's affairs, other people's happiness,
and old age would come on imperceptibly, and life would reach its
end--and nothing more was wanted. He did not care, he wished for
nothing, and could reason about it coolly, but there was a sort of
heaviness in his face especially under his eyes, his forehead felt
drawn tight like elastic--and tears were almost starting into his
eyes. Feeling weak all over, he lay down on his bed, and in five
minutes was sound asleep.



III


The proposal Laptev had made so suddenly threw Yulia Sergeyevna
into despair.


She knew Laptev very little, had made his acquaintance by chance;
he was a rich man, a partner in the well-known Moscow firm of "Fyodor
Laptev and Sons"; always serious, apparently clever, and anxious
about his sister's illness. It had seemed to her that he took no
notice of her whatever, and she did not care about him in the least
--and then all of a sudden that declaration on the stairs, that
pitiful, ecstatic face. . . .


The offer had overwhelmed her by its suddenness and by the fact
that the word wife had been uttered, and by the necessity of rejecting
it. She could not remember what she had said to Laptev, but she
still felt traces of the sudden, unpleasant feeling with which she
had rejected him. He did not attract her; he looked like a shopman;
he was not interesting; she could not have answered him except with
a refusal, and yet she felt uncomfortable, as though she had done
wrong.


"My God! without waiting to get into the room, on the stairs," she
said to herself in despair, addressing the ikon which hung over her
pillow; "and no courting beforehand, but so strangely, so
oddly. . . ."


In her solitude her agitation grew more intense every hour, and it
was beyond her strength to master this oppressive feeling alone.
She needed some one to listen to her story and to tell her that she
had done right. But she had no one to talk to. She had lost her
mother long before; she thought her father a queer man, and could
not talk to him seriously. He worried her with his whims, his extreme
readiness to take offence, and his meaningless gestures; and as
soon as one began to talk to him, he promptly turned the conversation
on himself. And in her prayer she was not perfectly open, because
she did not know for certain what she ought to pray for.


The samovar was brought in. Yulia Sergeyevna, very pale and tired,
looking dejected, came into the dining-room to make tea--it was
one of her duties--and poured out a glass for her father. Sergey
Borisovitch, in his long coat that reached below his knees, with
his red face and unkempt hair, walked up and down the room with his
hands in his pockets, pacing, not from corner to corner, but backwards
and forwards at random, like a wild beast in its cage. He would
stand still by the table, sip his glass of tea with relish, and
pace about again, lost in thought.


"Laptev made me an offer to-day," said Yulia Sergeyevna, and she
flushed crimson.


The doctor looked at her and did not seem to understand.


"Laptev?" he queried. "Panaurov's brother-in-law?"


He was fond of his daughter; it was most likely that she would
sooner or later be married, and leave him, but he tried not to think
about that. He was afraid of being alone, and for some reason
fancied, that if he were left alone in that great house, he would
have an apoplectic stroke, but he did not like to speak of this
directly.


"Well, I'm delighted to hear it," he said, shrugging his shoulders.
"I congratulate you with all my heart. It offers you a splendid
opportunity for leaving me, to your great satisfaction. And I quite
understand your feelings. To live with an old father, an invalid,
half crazy, must be very irksome at your age. I quite understand
you. And the sooner I'm laid out and in the devil's clutches, the
better every one will be pleased. I congratulate you with all my
heart."


"I refused him."


The doctor felt relieved, but he was unable to stop himself and
went on:


"I wonder, I've long wondered, why I've not yet been put into a
madhouse--why I'm still wearing this coat instead of a strait-waistcoat?
I still have faith in justice, in goodness. I am a fool, an idealist,
and nowadays that's insanity, isn't it? And how do they repay me
for my honesty? They almost throw stones at me and ride rough-shod
over me. And even my nearest kith and kin do nothing but try to get
the better of me. It's high time the devil fetched an old fool like
me. . . ."


"There's no talking to you like a rational being!" said Yulia.


She got up from the table impulsively, and went to her room in great
wrath, remembering how often her father had been unjust to her. But
a little while afterwards she felt sorry for her father, too, and
when he was going to the club she went downstairs with him, and
shut the door after him. It was a rough and stormy night; the door
shook with the violence of the wind, and there were draughts in all
directions in the passage, so that the candle was almost blown out.
In her own domain upstairs Yulia Sergeyevna went the round of all
the rooms, making the sign of the cross over every door and window;
the wind howled, and it sounded as though some one were walking on
the roof. Never had it been so dreary, never had she felt so lonely.


She asked herself whether she had done right in rejecting a man,
simply because his appearance did not attract her. It was true he
was a man she did not love, and to marry him would mean renouncing
forever her dreams, her conceptions of happiness in married life,
but would she ever meet the man of whom she dreamed, and would he
love her? She was twenty-one already. There were no eligible young
men in the town. She pictured all the men she knew--government
clerks, schoolmasters, officers, and some of them were married
already, and their domestic life was conspicuous for its dreariness
and triviality; others were uninteresting, colourless, unintelligent,
immoral. Laptev was, anyway, a Moscow man, had taken his degree at
the university, spoke French. He lived in the capital, where there
were lots of clever, noble, remarkable people; where there was noise
and bustle, splendid theatres, musical evenings, first-rate
dressmakers, confectioners. . . . In the Bible it was written that
a wife must love her husband, and great importance was given to
love in novels, but wasn't there exaggeration in it? Was it out of
the question to enter upon married life without love? It was said,
of course, that love soon passed away, and that nothing was left
but habit, and that the object of married life was not to be found
in love, nor in happiness, but in duties, such as the bringing up
of one's children, the care of one's household, and so on. And
perhaps what was meant in the Bible was love for one's husband as
one's neighbour, respect for him, charity.


At night Yulia Sergeyevna read the evening prayers attentively,
then knelt down, and pressing her hands to her bosom, gazing at the
flame of the lamp before the ikon, said with feeling:


"Give me understanding, Holy Mother, our Defender! Give me
understanding, O Lord!"


She had in the course of her life come across elderly maiden ladies,
poor and of no consequence in the world, who bitterly repented and
openly confessed their regret that they had refused suitors in the
past. Would not the same thing happen to her? Had not she better
go into a convent or become a Sister of Mercy?


She undressed and got into bed, crossing herself and crossing the
air around her. Suddenly the bell rang sharply and plaintively in
the corridor.


"Oh, my God!" she said, feeling a nervous irritation all over her
at the sound. She lay still and kept thinking how poor this provincial
life was in events, monotonous and yet not peaceful. One was
constantly having to tremble, to feel apprehensive, angry or guilty,
and in the end one's nerves were so strained, that one was afraid
to peep out of the bedclothes.


A little while afterwards the bell rang just as sharply again. The
servant must have been asleep and had not heard. Yulia Sergeyevna
lighted a candle, and feeling vexed with the servant, began with a
shiver to dress, and when she went out into the corridor, the maid
was already closing the door downstairs.


"I thought it was the master, but it's some one from a patient,"
she said.


Yulia Sergeyevna went back to her room. She took a pack of cards
out of the chest of drawers, and decided that if after shuffling
the cards well and cutting, the bottom card turned out to be a red
one, it would mean _yes_--that is, she would accept Laptev's
offer; and that if it was a black, it would mean _no_. The card
turned out to be the ten of spades.


That relieved her mind--she fell asleep; but in the morning, she
was wavering again between _yes_ and _no_, and she was dwelling on
the thought that she could, if she chose, change her life. The
thought harassed her, she felt exhausted and unwell; but yet, soon
after eleven, she dressed and went to see Nina Fyodorovna. She
wanted to see Laptev: perhaps now he would seem more attractive to
her; perhaps she had been wrong about him hitherto. . . .


She found it hard to walk against the wind. She struggled along,
holding her hat on with both hands, and could see nothing for the
dust.



IV


Going into his sister's room, and seeing to his surprise Yulia
Sergeyevna, Laptev had again the humiliating sensation of a man who
feels himself an object of repulsion. He concluded that if after
what had happened yesterday she could bring herself so easily to
visit his sister and meet him, it must be because she was not
concerned about him, and regarded him as a complete nonentity. But
when he greeted her, and with a pale face and dust under her eyes
she looked at him mournfully and remorsefully, he saw that she,
too, was miserable.


She did not feel well. She only stayed ten minutes, and began saying
good-bye. And as she went out she said to Laptev:


"Will you see me home, Alexey Fyodorovitch?"


They walked along the street in silence, holding their hats, and
he, walking a little behind, tried to screen her from the wind. In
the lane it was more sheltered, and they walked side by side.


"Forgive me if I was not nice yesterday;" and her voice quavered
as though she were going to cry. "I was so wretched! I did not sleep
all night."


"I slept well all night," said Laptev, without looking at her; "but
that doesn't mean that I was happy. My life is broken. I'm deeply
unhappy, and after your refusal yesterday I go about like a man
poisoned. The most difficult thing was said yesterday. To-day I
feel no embarrassment and can talk to you frankly. I love you more
than my sister, more than my dead mother. . . . I can live without
my sister, and without my mother, and I have lived without them,
but life without you--is meaningless to me; I can't face it. . . ."


And now too, as usual, he guessed her intention.


He realised that she wanted to go back to what had happened the day
before, and with that object had asked him to accompany her, and
now was taking him home with her. But what could she add to her
refusal? What new idea had she in her head? From everything, from
her glances, from her smile, and even from her tone, from the way
she held her head and shoulders as she walked beside him, he saw
that, as before, she did not love him, that he was a stranger to
her. What more did she want to say?


Doctor Sergey Borisovitch was at home.


"You are very welcome. I'm always glad to see you, Fyodor Alexeyitch,"
he said, mixing up his Christian name and his father's. "Delighted,
delighted!"


He had never been so polite before, and Laptev saw that he knew of
his offer; he did not like that either. He was sitting now in the
drawing-room, and the room impressed him strangely, with its poor,
common decorations, its wretched pictures, and though there were
arm-chairs in it, and a huge lamp with a shade over it, it still
looked like an uninhabited place, a huge barn, and it was obvious
that no one could feel at home in such a room, except a man like
the doctor. The next room, almost twice as large, was called the
reception-room, and in it there were only rows of chairs, as though
for a dancing class. And while Laptev was sitting in the drawing-room
talking to the doctor about his sister, he began to be tortured by
a suspicion. Had not Yulia Sergeyevna been to his sister Nina's,
and then brought him here to tell him that she would accept him?
Oh, how awful it was! But the most awful thing of all was that his
soul was capable of such a suspicion. And he imagined how the father
and the daughter had spent the evening, and perhaps the night before,
in prolonged consultation, perhaps dispute, and at last had come
to the conclusion that Yulia had acted thoughtlessly in refusing a
rich man. The words that parents use in such cases kept ringing in
his ears:


"It is true you don't love him, but think what good you could do!"


The doctor was going out to see patients. Laptev would have gone
with him, but Yulia Sergeyevna said:


"I beg you to stay."


She was distressed and dispirited, and told herself now that to
refuse an honourable, good man who loved her, simply because he was
not attractive, especially when marrying him would make it possible
for her to change her mode of life, her cheerless, monotonous, idle
life in which youth was passing with no prospect of anything better
in the future--to refuse him under such circumstances was madness,
caprice and folly, and that God might even punish her for it.


The father went out. When the sound of his steps had died away, she
suddenly stood up before Laptev and said resolutely, turning horribly
white as she did so:


"I thought for a long time yesterday, Alexey Fyodorovitch. . . . I
accept your offer."


He bent down and kissed her hand. She kissed him awkwardly on the
head with cold lips.


He felt that in this love scene the chief thing--her love--was
lacking, and that there was a great deal that was not wanted; and
he longed to cry out, to run away, to go back to Moscow at once.
But she was close to him, and she seemed to him so lovely, and he
was suddenly overcome by passion. He reflected that it was too late
for deliberation now; he embraced her passionately, and muttered
some words, calling her _thou_; he kissed her on the neck, and then
on the cheek, on the head. . . .


She walked away to the window, dismayed by these demonstrations,
and both of them were already regretting what they had said and
both were asking themselves in confusion:


"Why has this happened?"


"If only you knew how miserable I am!" she said, wringing her hands.


"What is it?" he said, going up to her, wringing his hands too. "My
dear, for God's sake, tell me--what is it? Only tell the truth,
I entreat you--nothing but the truth!"


"Don't pay any attention to it," she said, and forced herself to
smile. "I promise you I'll be a faithful, devoted wife. . . . Come
this evening."


Sitting afterwards with his sister and reading aloud an historical
novel, he recalled it all and felt wounded that his splendid, pure,
rich feeling was met with such a shallow response. He was not loved,
but his offer had been accepted--in all probability because he
was rich: that is, what was thought most of in him was what he
valued least of all in himself. It was quite possible that Yulia,
who was so pure and believed in God, had not once thought of his
money; but she did not love him--did not love him, and evidently
she had interested motives, vague, perhaps, and not fully thought
out--still, it was so. The doctor's house with its common furniture
was repulsive to him, and he looked upon the doctor himself as a
wretched, greasy miser, a sort of operatic Gaspard from "Les Cloches
de Corneville." The very name "Yulia" had a vulgar sound. He imagined
how he and his Yulia would stand at their wedding, in reality
complete strangers to one another, without a trace of feeling on
her side, just as though their marriage had been made by a professional
matchmaker; and the only consolation left him now, as commonplace
as the marriage itself, was the reflection that he was not the
first, and would not be the last; that thousands of people were
married like that; and that with time, when Yulia came to know him
better, she would perhaps grow fond of him.


"Romeo and Juliet!" he said, as he shut the novel, and he laughed.
"I am Romeo, Nina. You may congratulate me. I made an offer to Yulia
Byelavin to-day."


Nina Fyodorovna thought he was joking, but when she believed it,
she began to cry; she was not pleased at the news.


"Well, I congratulate you," she said. "But why is it so sudden?"


"No, it's not sudden. It's been going on since March, only you don't
notice anything. . . . I fell in love with her last March when I
made her acquaintance here, in your rooms."


"I thought you would marry some one in our Moscow set," said Nina
Fyodorovna after a pause. "Girls in our set are simpler. But what
matters, Alyosha, is that you should be happy--that matters most.
My Grigory Nikolaitch did not love me, and there's no concealing
it; you can see what our life is. Of course any woman may love you
for your goodness and your brains, but, you see, Yulitchka is a
girl of good family from a high-class boarding-school; goodness and
brains are not enough for her. She is young, and, you, Alyosha, are
not so young, and are not good-looking."


To soften the last words, she stroked his head and said:


"You're not good-looking, but you're a dear."


She was so agitated that a faint flush came into her cheeks, and
she began discussing eagerly whether it would be the proper thing
for her to bless Alyosha with the ikon at the wedding. She was, she
reasoned, his elder sister, and took the place of his mother; and
she kept trying to convince her dejected brother that the wedding
must be celebrated in proper style, with pomp and gaiety, so that
no one could find fault with it.


Then he began going to the Byelavins' as an accepted suitor, three
or four times a day; and now he never had time to take Sasha's place
and read aloud the historical novel. Yulia used to receive him in
her two rooms, which were at a distance from the drawing-room and
her father's study, and he liked them very much. The walls in them
were dark; in the corner stood a case of ikons; and there was a
smell of good scent and of the oil in the holy lamp. Her rooms were
at the furthest end of the house; her bedstead and dressing-table
were shut off by a screen. The doors of the bookcase were covered
on the inside with a green curtain, and there were rugs on the
floor, so that her footsteps were noiseless--and from this he
concluded that she was of a reserved character, and that she liked
a quiet, peaceful, secluded life. In her own home she was treated
as though she were not quite grown up. She had no money of her own,
and sometimes when they were out for walks together, she was overcome
with confusion at not having a farthing. Her father allowed her
very little for dress and books, hardly ten pounds a year. And,
indeed, the doctor himself had not much money in spite of his good
practice. He played cards every night at the club, and always lost.
Moreover, he bought mortgaged houses through a building society,
and let them. The tenants were irregular in paying the rent, but
he was convinced that such speculations were profitable. He had
mortgaged his own house in which he and his daughter were living,
and with the money so raised had bought a piece of waste ground,
and had already begun to build on it a large two-storey house,
meaning to mortgage it, too, as soon as it was finished.


Laptev now lived in a sort of cloud, feeling as though he were not
himself, but his double, and did many things which he would never
have brought himself to do before. He went three or four times to
the club with the doctor, had supper with him, and offered him money
for house-building. He even visited Panaurov at his other establishment.
It somehow happened that Panaurov invited him to dinner, and without
thinking, Laptev accepted. He was received by a lady of five-and-thirty.
She was tall and thin, with hair touched with grey, and black
eyebrows, apparently not Russian. There were white patches of powder
on her face. She gave him a honeyed smile and pressed his hand
jerkily, so that the bracelets on her white hands tinkled. It seemed
to Laptev that she smiled like that because she wanted to conceal
from herself and from others that she was unhappy. He also saw two
little girls, aged five and three, who had a marked likeness to
Sasha. For dinner they had milk-soup, cold veal, and chocolate. It
was insipid and not good; but the table was splendid, with gold
forks, bottles of Soyer, and cayenne pepper, an extraordinary bizarre
cruet-stand, and a gold pepper-pot.


It was only as he was finishing the milk-soup that Laptev realised
how very inappropriate it was for him to be dining there. The lady
was embarrassed, and kept smiling, showing her teeth. Panaurov
expounded didactically what being in love was, and what it was due
to.


"We have in it an example of the action of electricity," he said
in French, addressing the lady. "Every man has in his skin microscopic
glands which contain currents of electricity. If you meet with a
person whose currents are parallel with your own, then you get
love."


When Laptev went home and his sister asked him where he had been
he felt awkward, and made no answer.


He felt himself in a false position right up to the time of the
wedding. His love grew more intense every day, and Yulia seemed to
him a poetic and exalted creature; but, all the same, there was no
mutual love, and the truth was that he was buying her and she was
selling herself. Sometimes, thinking things over, he fell into
despair and asked himself: should he run away? He did not sleep for
nights together, and kept thinking how he should meet in Moscow the
lady whom he had called in his letters "a certain person," and what
attitude his father and his brother, difficult people, would take
towards his marriage and towards Yulia. He was afraid that his
father would say something rude to Yulia at their first meeting.
And something strange had happened of late to his brother Fyodor.
In his long letters he had taken to writing of the importance of
health, of the effect of illness on the mental condition, of the
meaning of religion, but not a word about Moscow or business. These
letters irritated Laptev, and he thought his brother's character
was changing for the worse.


The wedding was in September. The ceremony took place at the Church
of St. Peter and St. Paul, after mass, and the same day the young
couple set off for Moscow. When Laptev and his wife, in a black
dress with a long train, already looking not a girl but a married
woman, said good-bye to Nina Fyodorovna, the invalid's face worked,
but there was no tear in her dry eyes. She said:


"If--which God forbid--I should die, take care of my little
girls."


"Oh, I promise!" answered Yulia Sergeyevna, and her lips and eyelids
began quivering too.


"I shall come to see you in October," said Laptev, much moved. "You
must get better, my darling."


They travelled in a special compartment. Both felt depressed and
uncomfortable. She sat in the corner without taking off her hat,
and made a show of dozing, and he lay on the seat opposite, and he
was disturbed by various thoughts--of his father, of "a certain
person," whether Yulia would like her Moscow flat. And looking at
his wife, who did not love him, he wondered dejectedly "why this
had happened."



V


The Laptevs had a wholesale business in Moscow, dealing in fancy
goods: fringe, tape, trimmings, crochet cotton, buttons, and so on.
The gross receipts reached two millions a year; what the net profit
was, no one knew but the old father. The sons and the clerks estimated
the profits at approximately three hundred thousand, and said that
it would have been a hundred thousand more if the old man had not
"been too free-handed"--that is, had not allowed credit
indiscriminately. In the last ten years alone the bad debts had
mounted up to the sum of a million; and when the subject was referred
to, the senior clerk would wink slyly and deliver himself of sentences
the meaning of which was not clear to every one:


"The psychological sequences of the age."


Their chief commercial operations were conducted in the town market
in a building which was called the warehouse. The entrance to the
warehouse was in the yard, where it was always dark, and smelt of
matting and where the dray-horses were always stamping their hoofs
on the asphalt. A very humble-looking door, studded with iron, led
from the yard into a room with walls discoloured by damp and scrawled
over with charcoal, lighted up by a narrow window covered by an
iron grating. Then on the left was another room larger and cleaner
with an iron stove and a couple of chairs, though it, too, had a
prison window: this was the office, and from it a narrow stone
staircase led up to the second storey, where the principal room
was. This was rather a large room, but owing to the perpetual
darkness, the low-pitched ceiling, the piles of boxes and bales,
and the numbers of men that kept flitting to and fro in it, it made
as unpleasant an impression on a newcomer as the others. In the
offices on the top storey the goods lay in bales, in bundles and
in cardboard boxes on the shelves; there was no order nor neatness
in the arrangement of it, and if crimson threads, tassels, ends of
fringe, had not peeped out here and there from holes in the paper
parcels, no one could have guessed what was being bought and sold
here. And looking at these crumpled paper parcels and boxes, no one
would have believed that a million was being made out of such trash,
and that fifty men were employed every day in this warehouse, not
counting the buyers.


When at midday, on the day after his arrival at Moscow, Laptev went
into the warehouse, the workmen packing the goods were hammering
so loudly that in the outer room and the office no one heard him
come in. A postman he knew was coming down the stairs with a bundle
of letters in his hand; he was wincing at the noise, and he did not
notice Laptev either. The first person to meet him upstairs was his
brother Fyodor Fyodorovitch, who was so like him that they passed
for twins. This resemblance always reminded Laptev of his own
personal appearance, and now, seeing before him a short, red-faced
man with rather thin hair, with narrow plebeian hips, looking so
uninteresting and so unintellectual, he asked himself: "Can I really
look like that?"


"How glad I am to see you!" said Fyodor, kissing his brother and
pressing his hand warmly. "I have been impatiently looking forward
to seeing you every day, my dear fellow. When you wrote that you
were getting married, I was tormented with curiosity, and I've
missed you, too, brother. Only fancy, it's six months since we saw
each other. Well? How goes it? Nina's very bad? Awfully bad?"


"Awfully bad."


"It's in God's hands," sighed Fyodor. "Well, what of your wife?
She's a beauty, no doubt? I love her already. Of course, she is my
little sister now. We'll make much of her between us."


Laptev saw the broad, bent back--so familiar to him--of his
father, Fyodor Stepanovitch. The old man was sitting on a stool
near the counter, talking to a customer.


"Father, God has sent us joy!" cried Fyodor. "Brother has come!"


Fyodor Stepanovitch was a tall man of exceptionally powerful build,
so that, in spite of his wrinkles and eighty years, he still looked
a hale and vigorous man. He spoke in a deep, rich, sonorous voice,
that resounded from his broad chest as from a barrel. He wore no
beard, but a short-clipped military moustache, and smoked cigars.
As he was always too hot, he used all the year round to wear a
canvas coat at home and at the warehouse. He had lately had an
operation for cataract. His sight was bad, and he did nothing in
the business but talk to the customers and have tea and jam with
them.


Laptev bent down and kissed his head and then his lips.


"It's a good long time since we saw you, honoured sir," said the
old man--"a good long time. Well, am I to congratulate you on
entering the state of holy matrimony? Very well, then; I congratulate
you."


And he put his lips out to be kissed. Laptev bent down and kissed
him.


"Well, have you brought your young lady?" the old man asked, and
without waiting for an answer, he said, addressing the customer:
"'Herewith I beg to inform you, father, that I'm going to marry such
and such a young lady.' Yes. But as for asking for his father's
counsel or blessing, that's not in the rules nowadays. Now they go
their own way. When I married I was over forty, but I went on my
knees to my father and asked his advice. Nowadays we've none of
that."


The old man was delighted to see his son, but thought it unseemly
to show his affection or make any display of his joy. His voice and
his manner of saying "your young lady" brought back to Laptev the
depression he had always felt in the warehouse. Here every trifling
detail reminded him of the past, when he used to be flogged and put
on Lenten fare; he knew that even now boys were thrashed and punched
in the face till their noses bled, and that when those boys grew
up they would beat others. And before he had been five minutes in
the warehouse, he always felt as though he were being scolded or
punched in the face.


Fyodor slapped the customer on the shoulder and said to his brother:


"Here, Alyosha, I must introduce our Tambov benefactor, Grigory
Timofeitch. He might serve as an example for the young men of the
day; he's passed his fiftieth birthday, and he has tiny children."


The clerks laughed, and the customer, a lean old man with a pale
face, laughed too.


"Nature above the normal capacity," observed the head-clerk, who
was standing at the counter close by. "It always comes out when
it's there."


The head-clerk--a tall man of fifty, in spectacles, with a dark
beard, and a pencil behind his ear--usually expressed his ideas
vaguely in roundabout hints, while his sly smile betrayed that he
attached particular significance to his words. He liked to obscure
his utterances with bookish words, which he understood in his own
way, and many such words he used in a wrong sense. For instance,
the word "except." When he had expressed some opinion positively
and did not want to be contradicted, he would stretch out his hand
and pronounce:


"Except!"


And what was most astonishing, the customers and the other clerks
understood him perfectly. His name was Ivan Vassilitch Potchatkin,
and he came from Kashira. Now, congratulating Laptev, he expressed
himself as follows:


"It's the reward of valour, for the female heart is a strong
opponent."


Another important person in the warehouse was a clerk called
Makeitchev--a stout, solid, fair man with whiskers and a perfectly
bald head. He went up to Laptev and congratulated him respectfully
in a low voice:


"I have the honour, sir. . . The Lord has heard your parent's prayer.
Thank God."


Then the other clerks began coming up to congratulate him on his
marriage. They were all fashionably dressed, and looked like perfectly
well-bred, educated men. Since between every two words they put in
a "sir," their congratulations--something like "Best wishes, sir,
for happiness, sir," uttered very rapidly in a low voice--sounded
rather like the hiss of a whip in the air--"Shshsh-s s s s s!"
Laptev was soon bored and longing to go home, but it was awkward
to go away. He was obliged to stay at least two hours at the warehouse
to keep up appearances. He walked away from the counter and began
asking Makeitchev whether things had gone well while he was away,
and whether anything new had turned up, and the clerk answered him
respectfully, avoiding his eyes. A boy with a cropped head, wearing
a grey blouse, handed Laptev a glass of tea without a saucer; not
long afterwards another boy, passing by, stumbled over a box, and
almost fell down, and Makeitchev's face looked suddenly spiteful
and ferocious like a wild beast's, and he shouted at him:


"Keep on your feet!"


The clerks were pleased that their young master was married and had
come back at last; they looked at him with curiosity and friendly
feeling, and each one thought it his duty to say something agreeable
when he passed him. But Laptev was convinced that it was not genuine,
and that they were only flattering him because they were afraid of
him. He never could forget how fifteen years before, a clerk, who
was mentally deranged, had run out into the street with nothing on
but his shirt and shaking his fists at the windows, shouted that
he had been ill-treated; and how, when the poor fellow had recovered,
the clerks had jeered at him for long afterwards, reminding him how
he had called his employers "planters" instead of "exploiters."
Altogether the employees at Laptevs' had a very poor time of it,
and this fact was a subject of conversation for the whole market.
The worst of it was that the old man, Fyodor Stepanovitch, maintained
something of an Asiatic despotism in his attitude to them. Thus,
no one knew what wages were paid to the old man's favourites,
Potchatkin and Makeitchev. They received no more than three thousand
a year, together with bonuses, but he made out that he paid then
seven. The bonuses were given to all the clerks every year, but
privately, so that the man who got little was bound from vanity to
say he had got more. Not one boy knew when he would be promoted to
be a clerk; not one of the men knew whether his employer was satisfied
with him or not. Nothing was directly forbidden, and so the clerks
never knew what was allowed, and what was not. They were not forbidden
to marry, but they did not marry for fear of displeasing their
employer and losing their place. They were allowed to have friends
and pay visits, but the gates were shut at nine o'clock, and every
morning the old man scanned them all suspiciously, and tried to
detect any smell of vodka about them:


"Now then, breathe," he would say.


Every clerk was obliged to go to early service, and to stand in
church in such a position that the old man could see them all. The
fasts were strictly observed. On great occasions, such as the
birthday of their employer or of any member of his family, the
clerks had to subscribe and present a cake from Fley's, or an album.
The clerks lived three or four in a room in the lower storey, and
in the lodges of the house in Pyatnitsky Street, and at dinner ate
from a common bowl, though there was a plate set before each of
them. If one of the family came into the room while they were at
dinner, they all stood up.


Laptev was conscious that only, perhaps, those among them who had
been corrupted by the old man's training could seriously regard him
as their benefactor; the others must have looked on him as an enemy
and a "planter." Now, after six months' absence, he saw no change
for the better; there was indeed something new which boded nothing
good. His brother Fyodor, who had always been quiet, thoughtful,
and extremely refined, was now running about the warehouse with a
pencil behind his ear making a show of being very busy and businesslike,
slapping customers on the shoulder and shouting "Friends!" to the
clerks. Apparently he had taken up a new role, and Alexey did not
recognise him in the part.


The old man's voice boomed unceasingly. Having nothing to do, he
was laying down the law to a customer, telling him how he should
order his life and his business, always holding himself up as an
example. That boastfulness, that aggressive tone of authority,
Laptev had heard ten, fifteen, twenty years ago. The old man adored
himself; from what he said it always appeared that he had made his
wife and all her relations happy, that he had been munificent to
his children, and a benefactor to his clerks and employÃ©s, and that
every one in the street and all his acquaintances remembered him
in their prayers. Whatever he did was always right, and if things
went wrong with people it was because they did not take his advice;
without his advice nothing could succeed. In church he stood in the
foremost place, and even made observations to the priests, if in
his opinion they were not conducting the service properly, and
believed that this was pleasing God because God loved him.


At two o'clock every one in the warehouse was hard at work, except
the old man, who still went on booming in his deep voice. To avoid
standing idle, Laptev took some trimmings from a workgirl and let
her go; then listened to a customer, a merchant from Vologda, and
told a clerk to attend to him.


"T. V. A.!" resounded on all sides (prices were denoted by letters
in the warehouse and goods by numbers). "R. I. T.!" As he went away,
Laptev said good-bye to no one but Fyodor.


"I shall come to Pyatnitsky Street with my wife to-morrow," he said;
"but I warn you, if father says a single rude thing to her, I shall
not stay there another minute."


"You're the same as ever," sighed Fyodor. "Marriage has not changed
you. You must be patient with the old man. So till eleven o'clock,
then. We shall expect you impatiently. Come directly after mass,
then."


"I don't go to mass."


"That does not matter. The great thing is not to be later than
eleven, so you may be in time to pray to God and to lunch with us.
Give my greetings to my little sister and kiss her hand for me. I
have a presentiment that I shall like her," Fyodor added with perfect
sincerity. "I envy you, brother!" he shouted after him as Alexey
went downstairs.


"And why does he shrink into himself in that shy way as though he
fancied he was naked?" thought Laptev, as he walked along Nikolsky
Street, trying to understand the change that had come over his
brother. "And his language is new, too: 'Brother, dear brother, God
has sent us joy; to pray to God'--just like Iudushka in Shtchedrin."



VI


At eleven o'clock the next day, which was Sunday, he was driving
with his wife along Pyatnitsky Street in a light, one-horse carriage.
He was afraid of his father's doing something outrageous, and was
already ill at ease. After two nights in her husband's house Yulia
Sergeyevna considered her marriage a mistake and a calamity, and
if she had had to live with her husband in any other town but Moscow,
it seemed to her that she could not have endured the horror of it.
Moscow entertained her--she was delighted with the streets, the
churches; and if it had been possible to drive about Moscow in those
splendid sledges with expensive horses, to drive the whole day from
morning till night, and with the swift motion to feel the cold
autumn air blowing upon her, she would perhaps not have felt herself
so unhappy.


Near a white, lately stuccoed two-storey house the coachman pulled
up his horse, and began to turn to the right. They were expected,
and near the gate stood two policemen and the porter in a new
full-skirted coat, high boots, and goloshes. The whole space, from
the middle of the street to the gates and all over the yard from
the porch, was strewn with fresh sand. The porter took off his hat,
the policemen saluted. Near the entrance Fyodor met them with a
very serious face.


"Very glad to make your acquaintance, little sister," he said,
kissing Yulia's hand. "You're very welcome."


He led her upstairs on his arm, and then along a corridor through
a crowd of men and women. The anteroom was crowded too, and smelt
of incense.


"I will introduce you to our father directly," whispered Fyodor in
the midst of a solemn, deathly silence. "A venerable old man,
_pater-familias_."


In the big drawing-room, by a table prepared for service, Fyodor
Stepanovitch stood, evidently waiting for them, and with him the
priest in a calotte, and a deacon. The old man shook hands with
Yulia without saying a word. Every one was silent. Yulia was overcome
with confusion.


The priest and the deacon began putting on their vestments. A censer
was brought in, giving off sparks and fumes of incense and charcoal.
The candles were lighted. The clerks walked into the drawing-room
on tiptoe and stood in two rows along the wall. There was perfect
stillness, no one even coughed.


"The blessing of God," began the deacon. The service was read with
great solemnity; nothing was left out and two canticles were sung
--to sweetest Jesus and the most Holy Mother of God. The singers
sang very slowly, holding up the music before them. Laptev noticed
how confused his wife was. While they were singing the canticles,
and the singers in different keys brought out "Lord have mercy on
us," he kept expecting in nervous suspense that the old man would
make some remark such as, "You don't know how to cross yourself,"
and he felt vexed. Why this crowd, and why this ceremony with priests
and choristers? It was too bourgeois. But when she, like the old
man, put her head under the gospel and afterwards several times
dropped upon her knees, he realised that she liked it all, and was
reassured.


At the end of the service, during "Many, many years," the priest
gave the old man and Alexey the cross to kiss, but when Yulia went
up, he put his hand over the cross, and showed he wanted to speak.
Signs were made to the singers to stop.


"The prophet Samuel," began the priest, "went to Bethlehem at the
bidding of the Lord, and there the elders of the town with fear and
trembling asked him: 'Comest thou peaceably?' And the prophet
answered: 'Peaceably: I am come to sacrifice unto the Lord: sanctify
yourselves and come with me to the sacrifice.' Even so, Yulia,
servant of God, shall we ask of thee, Dost thou come bringing peace
into this house?"


Yulia flushed with emotion. As he finished, the priest gave her the
cross to kiss, and said in quite a different tone of voice:


"Now Fyodor Fyodorovitch must be married; it's high time."


The choir began singing once more, people began moving, and the
room was noisy again. The old man, much touched, with his eyes full
of tears, kissed Yulia three times, made the sign of the cross over
her face, and said:


"This is your home. I'm an old man and need nothing."


The clerks congratulated her and said something, but the choir was
singing so loud that nothing else could be heard. Then they had
lunch and drank champagne. She sat beside the old father, and he
talked to her, saying that families ought not to be parted but live
together in one house; that separation and disunion led to permanent
rupture.


"I've made money and the children only do the spending of it," he
said. "Now, you live with me and save money. It's time for an old
man like me to rest."


Yulia had all the time a vision of Fyodor flitting about so like
her husband, but shyer and more restless; he fussed about her and
often kissed her hand.


"We are plain people, little sister," he said, and patches of red
came into his face as he spoke. "We live simply in Russian style,
like Christians, little sister."


As they went home, Laptev felt greatly relieved that everything had
gone off so well, and that nothing outrageous had happened as he
had expected. He said to his wife:


"You're surprised that such a stalwart, broad-shouldered father
should have such stunted, narrow-chested sons as Fyodor and me.
Yes; but it's easy to explain! My father married my mother when he
was forty-five, and she was only seventeen. She turned pale and
trembled in his presence. Nina was born first--born of a comparatively
healthy mother, and so she was finer and sturdier than we were.
Fyodor and I were begotten and born after mother had been worn out
by terror. I can remember my father correcting me--or, to speak
plainly, beating me--before I was five years old. He used to
thrash me with a birch, pull my ears, hit me on the head, and every
morning when I woke up my first thought was whether he would beat
me that day. Play and childish mischief was forbidden us. We had
to go to morning service and to early mass. When we met priests or
monks we had to kiss their hands; at home we had to sing hymns.
Here you are religious and love all that, but I'm afraid of religion,
and when I pass a church I remember my childhood, and am overcome
with horror. I was taken to the warehouse as soon as I was eight
years old. I worked like a working boy, and it was bad for my health,
for I used to be beaten there every day. Afterwards when I went to
the high school, I used to go to school till dinner-time, and after
dinner I had to sit in that warehouse till evening; and things went
on like that till I was twenty-two, till I got to know Yartsev, and
he persuaded me to leave my father's house. That Yartsev did a great
deal for me. I tell you what," said Laptev, and he laughed with
pleasure: "let us go and pay Yartsev a visit at once. He's a very
fine fellow! How touched he will be!"



VII


On a Saturday in November Anton Rubinstein was conducting in a
symphony concert. It was very hot and crowded. Laptev stood behind
the columns, while his wife and Kostya Kotchevoy were sitting in
the third or fourth row some distance in front. At the very beginning
of an interval a "certain person," Polina Nikolaevna Razsudin, quite
unexpectedly passed by him. He had often since his marriage thought
with trepidation of a possible meeting with her. When now she looked
at him openly and directly, he realised that he had all this time
shirked having things out with her, or writing her two or three
friendly lines, as though he had been hiding from her; he felt
ashamed and flushed crimson. She pressed his hand tightly and
impulsively and asked:


"Have you seen Yartsev?"


And without waiting for an answer she went striding on impetuously
as though some one were pushing her on from behind.


She was very thin and plain, with a long nose; her face always
looked tired, and exhausted, and it seemed as though it were an
effort to her to keep her eyes open, and not to fall down. She had
fine, dark eyes, and an intelligent, kind, sincere expression, but
her movements were awkward and abrupt. It was hard to talk to her,
because she could not talk or listen quietly. Loving her was not
easy. Sometimes when she was alone with Laptev she would go on
laughing for a long time, hiding her face in her hands, and would
declare that love was not the chief thing in life for her, and would
be as whimsical as a girl of seventeen; and before kissing her he
would have to put out all the candles. She was thirty. She was
married to a schoolmaster, but had not lived with her husband for
years. She earned her living by giving music lessons and playing
in quartettes.


During the ninth symphony she passed again as though by accident,
but the crowd of men standing like a thick wall behind the columns
prevented her going further, and she remained beside him. Laptev
saw that she was wearing the same little velvet blouse she had worn
at concerts last year and the year before. Her gloves were new, and
her fan, too, was new, but it was a common one. She was fond of
fine clothes, but she did not know how to dress, and grudged spending
money on it. She dressed so badly and untidily that when she was
going to her lessons striding hurriedly down the street, she might
easily have been taken for a young monk.


The public applauded and shouted encore.


"You'll spend the evening with me," said Polina Nikolaevna, going
up to Laptev and looking at him severely. "When this is over we'll
go and have tea. Do you hear? I insist on it. You owe me a great
deal, and haven't the moral right to refuse me such a trifle."


"Very well; let us go," Laptev assented.


Endless calls followed the conclusion of the concert. The audience
got up from their seats and went out very slowly, and Laptev could
not go away without telling his wife. He had to stand at the door
and wait.


"I'm dying for some tea," Polina Nikolaevna said plaintively. "My
very soul is parched."


"You can get something to drink here," said Laptev. "Let's go to
the buffet."


"Oh, I've no money to fling away on waiters. I'm not a shopkeeper."


He offered her his arm; she refused, in a long, wearisome sentence
which he had heard many times, to the effect that she did not class
herself with the feebler fair sex, and did not depend on the services
of gentlemen.


As she talked to him she kept looking about at the audience and
greeting acquaintances; they were her fellow-students at the higher
courses and at the conservatorium, and her pupils. She gripped their
hands abruptly, as though she were tugging at them. But then she
began twitching her shoulders, and trembling as though she were in
a fever, and at last said softly, looking at Laptev with horror:


"Who is it you've married? Where were your eyes, you mad fellow?
What did you see in that stupid, insignificant girl? Why, I loved
you for your mind, for your soul, but that china doll wants nothing
but your money!"


"Let us drop that, Polina," he said in a voice of supplication.
"All that you can say to me about my marriage I've said to myself
many times already. Don't cause me unnecessary pain."


Yulia Sergeyevna made her appearance, wearing a black dress with a
big diamond brooch, which her father-in-law had sent her after the
service. She was followed by her suite--Kotchevoy, two doctors
of their acquaintance, an officer, and a stout young man in student's
uniform, called Kish.


"You go on with Kostya," Laptev said to his wife. "I'm coming later."


Yulia nodded and went on. Polina Nikolaevna gazed after her, quivering
all over and twitching nervously, and in her eyes there was a look
of repulsion, hatred, and pain.


Laptev was afraid to go home with her, foreseeing an unpleasant
discussion, cutting words, and tears, and he suggested that they
should go and have tea at a restaurant. But she said:


"No, no. I want to go home. Don't dare to talk to me of restaurants."


She did not like being in a restaurant, because the atmosphere of
restaurants seemed to her poisoned by tobacco smoke and the breath
of men. Against all men she did not know she cherished a strange
prejudice, regarding them all as immoral rakes, capable of attacking
her at any moment. Besides, the music played at restaurants jarred
on her nerves and gave her a headache.


Coming out of the Hall of Nobility, they took a sledge in Ostozhenka
and drove to Savelovsky Lane, where she lodged. All the way Laptev
thought about her. It was true that he owed her a great deal. He
had made her acquaintance at the flat of his friend Yartsev, to
whom she was giving lessons in harmony. Her love for him was deep
and perfectly disinterested, and her relations with him did not
alter her habits; she went on giving her lessons and wearing herself
out with work as before. Through her he came to understand and love
music, which he had scarcely cared for till then.


"Half my kingdom for a cup of tea!" she pronounced in a hollow
voice, covering her mouth with her muff that she might not catch
cold. "I've given five lessons, confound them! My pupils are as
stupid as posts; I nearly died of exasperation. I don't know how
long this slavery can go on. I'm worn out. As soon as I can scrape
together three hundred roubles, I shall throw it all up and go to
the Crimea, to lie on the beach and drink in ozone. How I love the
sea--oh, how I love the sea!"


"You'll never go," said Laptev. "To begin with, you'll never save
the money; and, besides, you'd grudge spending it. Forgive me, I
repeat again: surely it's quite as humiliating to collect the money
by farthings from idle people who have music lessons to while away
their time, as to borrow it from your friends."


"I haven't any friends," she said irritably. "And please don't talk
nonsense. The working class to which I belong has one privilege:
the consciousness of being incorruptible--the right to refuse to
be indebted to wretched little shopkeepers, and to treat them with
scorn. No, indeed, you don't buy me! I'm not a Yulitchka!"


Laptev did not attempt to pay the driver, knowing that it would
call forth a perfect torrent of words, such as he had often heard
before. She paid herself.


She had a little furnished room in the flat of a solitary lady who
provided her meals. Her big Becker piano was for the time at Yartsev's
in Great Nikitsky Street, and she went there every day to play on
it. In her room there were armchairs in loose covers, a bed with a
white summer quilt, and flowers belonging to the landlady; there
were oleographs on the walls, and there was nothing that would have
suggested that there was a woman, and a woman of university education,
living in it. There was no toilet table; there were no books; there
was not even a writing-table. It was evident that she went to bed
as soon as she got home, and went out as soon as she got up in the
morning.


The cook brought in the samovar. Polina Nikolaevna made tea, and,
still shivering--the room was cold--began abusing the singers
who had sung in the ninth symphony. She was so tired she could
hardly keep her eyes open. She drank one glass of tea, then a second,
and then a third.


"And so you are married," she said. "But don't be uneasy; I'm not
going to pine away. I shall be able to tear you out of my heart.
Only it's annoying and bitter to me that you are just as contemptible
as every one else; that what you want in a woman is not brains or
intellect, but simply a body, good looks, and youth. . . . Youth!"
she pronounced through her nose, as though mimicking some one, and
she laughed. "Youth! You must have purity, _reinheit! reinheit!_"
she laughed, throwing herself back in her chair. "_Reinheit!_"


When she left off laughing her eyes were wet with tears.


"You're happy, at any rate?" she asked.


"No."


"Does she love you?"


Laptev, agitated, and feeling miserable, stood up and began walking
about the room.


"No," he repeated. "If you want to know, Polina, I'm very unhappy.
There's no help for it; I've done the stupid thing, and there's no
correcting it now. I must look at it philosophically. She married
me without love, stupidly, perhaps with mercenary motives, but
without understanding, and now she evidently sees her mistake and
is miserable. I see it. At night we sleep together, but by day she
is afraid to be left alone with me for five minutes, and tries to
find distraction, society. With me she feels ashamed and frightened."


"And yet she takes money from you?"


"That's stupid, Polina!" cried Laptev. "She takes money from me
because it makes absolutely no difference to her whether she has
it or not. She is an honest, pure girl. She married me simply because
she wanted to get away from her father, that's all."


"And are you sure she would have married you if you had not been
rich?" asked Polina.


"I'm not sure of anything," said Laptev dejectedly. "Not of anything.
I don't understand anything. For God's sake, Polina, don't let us
talk about it."


"Do you love her?"


"Desperately."


A silence followed. She drank a fourth glass, while he paced up and
down, thinking that by now his wife was probably having supper at
the doctors' club.


"But is it possible to love without knowing why?" asked Polina,
shrugging her shoulders. "No; it's the promptings of animal passion!
You are poisoned, intoxicated by that beautiful body, that _reinheit!_
Go away from me; you are unclean! Go to her!"


She brandished her hand at him, then took up his hat and hurled it
at him. He put on his fur coat without speaking and went out, but
she ran after him into the passage, clutched his arm above the
elbow, and broke into sobs.


"Hush, Polina! Don't!" he said, and could not unclasp her fingers.
"Calm yourself, I entreat you."


She shut her eyes and turned pale, and her long nose became an
unpleasant waxy colour like a corpse's, and Laptev still could not
unclasp her fingers. She had fainted. He lifted her up carefully,
laid her on her bed, and sat by her for ten minutes till she came
to herself. Her hands were cold, her pulse was weak and uneven.


"Go home," she said, opening her eyes. "Go away, or I shall begin
howling again. I must take myself in hand."


When he came out, instead of going to the doctors' club where his
friends were expecting him, he went home. All the way home he was
asking himself reproachfully why he had not settled down to married
life with that woman who loved him so much, and was in reality his
wife and friend. She was the one human being who was devoted to
him; and, besides, would it not have been a grateful and worthy
task to give happiness, peace, and a home to that proud, clever,
overworked creature? Was it for him, he asked himself, to lay claim
to youth and beauty, to that happiness which could not be, and
which, as though in punishment or mockery, had kept him for the
last three months in a state of gloom and oppression. The honeymoon
was long over, and he still, absurd to say, did not know what sort
of person his wife was. To her school friends and her father she
wrote long letters of five sheets, and was never at a loss for
something to say to them, but to him she never spoke except about
the weather or to tell him that dinner was ready, or that it was
supper-time. When at night she said her lengthy prayers and then
kissed her crosses and ikons, he thought, watching her with hatred,
"Here she's praying. What's she praying about? What about?" In his
thoughts he showered insults on himself and her, telling himself
that when he got into bed and took her into his arms, he was taking
what he had paid for; but it was horrible. If only it had been a
healthy, reckless, sinful woman; but here he had youth, piety,
meekness, the pure eyes of innocence. . . . While they were engaged
her piety had touched him; now the conventional definiteness of her
views and convictions seemed to him a barrier, behind which the
real truth could not be seen. Already everything in his married
life was agonising. When his wife, sitting beside him in the theatre,
sighed or laughed spontaneously, it was bitter to him that she
enjoyed herself alone and would not share her delight with him. And
it was remarkable that she was friendly with all his friends, and
they all knew what she was like already, while he knew nothing about
her, and only moped and was dumbly jealous.


When he got home Laptev put on his dressing-gown and slippers, and
sat down in his study to read a novel. His wife was not at home.
But within half an hour there was a ring at the hall door, and he
heard the muffled footsteps of Pyotr running to open it. It was
Yulia. She walked into the study in her fur coat, her cheeks rosy
with the frost,


"There's a great fire in Pryesnya," she said breathlessly. "There's
a tremendous glow. I'm going to see it with Konstantin Ivanovitch."


"Well, do, dear!"


The sight of her health, her freshness, and the childish horror in
her eyes, reassured Laptev. He read for another half-hour and went
to bed.


Next day Polina Nikolaevna sent to the warehouse two books she had
borrowed from him, all his letters and his photographs; with them
was a note consisting of one word--_"basta."_



VIII


Towards the end of October Nina Fyodorovna had unmistakable symptoms
of a relapse. There was a change in her face, and she grew rapidly
thinner. In spite of acute pain she still imagined that she was
getting better, and got up and dressed every morning as though she
were well, and then lay on her bed, fully dressed, for the rest of
the day. And towards the end she became very talkative. She would
lie on her back and talk in a low voice, speaking with an effort
and breathing painfully. She died suddenly under the following
circumstances.


It was a clear moonlight evening. In the street people were tobogganing
in the fresh snow, and their clamour floated in at the window. Nina
Fyodorovna was lying on her back in bed, and Sasha, who had no one
to take turns with her now, was sitting beside her half asleep.


"I don't remember his father's name," Nina Fyodorovna was saying
softly, "but his name was Ivan Kotchevoy--a poor clerk. He was a
sad drunkard, the Kingdom of Heaven be his! He used to come to us,
and every month we used to give him a pound of sugar and two ounces
of tea. And money, too, sometimes, of course. Yes. . . . And then,
this is what happened. Our Kotchevoy began drinking heavily and
died, consumed by vodka. He left a little son, a boy of seven. Poor
little orphan! . . . We took him and hid him in the clerk's quarters,
and he lived there for a whole year, without father's knowing. And
when father did see him, he only waved his hand and said nothing.
When Kostya, the little orphan, was nine years old--by that time
I was engaged to be married--I took him round to all the day
schools. I went from one to the other, and no one would take him.
And he cried. . . . 'What are you crying for, little silly?' I said.
I took him to Razgulyay to the second school, where--God bless
them for it!--they took him, and the boy began going every day
on foot from Pyatnitsky Street to Razgulyay Street and back again
. . . . Alyosha paid for him. . . . By God's grace the boy got on,
was good at his lessons, and turned out well. . . . He's a lawyer
now in Moscow, a friend of Alyosha's, and so good in science. Yes,
we had compassion on a fellow-creature and took him into our house,
and now I daresay, he remembers us in his prayers. . . Yes. . . ."


Nina Fyodorovna spoke more and more slowly with long pauses, then
after a brief silence she suddenly raised herself and sat up.


"There's something the matter with me . . . something seems wrong,"
she said. "Lord have mercy on me! Oh, I can't breathe!"


Sasha knew that her mother would soon die; seeing now how suddenly
her face looked drawn, she guessed that it was the end, and she was
frightened.


"Mother, you mustn't!" she began sobbing. "You mustn't."


"Run to the kitchen; let them go for father. I am very ill indeed."


Sasha ran through all the rooms calling, but there were none of the
servants in the house, and the only person she found was Lida asleep
on a chest in the dining-room with her clothes on and without a
pillow. Sasha ran into the yard just as she was without her goloshes,
and then into the street. On a bench at the gate her nurse was
sitting watching the tobogganing. From beyond the river, where the
tobogganing slope was, came the strains of a military band.


"Nurse, mother's dying!" sobbed Sasha. "You must go for father! . . ."


The nurse went upstairs, and, glancing at the sick woman, thrust a
lighted wax candle into her hand. Sasha rushed about in terror and
besought some one to go for her father, then she put on a coat and
a kerchief, and ran into the street. From the servants she knew
already that her father had another wife and two children with whom
he lived in Bazarny Street. She ran out of the gate and turned to
the left, crying, and frightened of unknown people. She soon began
to sink into the snow and grew numb with cold.


She met an empty sledge, but she did not take it: perhaps, she
thought, the man would drive her out of town, rob her, and throw
her into the cemetery (the servants had talked of such a case at
tea). She went on and on, sobbing and panting with exhaustion. When
she got into Bazarny Street, she inquired where M. Panaurov lived.
An unknown woman spent a long time directing her, and seeing that
she did not understand, took her by the hand and led her to a house
of one storey that stood back from the street. The door stood open.
Sasha ran through the entry, along the corridor, and found herself
at last in a warm, lighted room where her father was sitting by the
samovar with a lady and two children. But by now she was unable to
utter a word, and could only sob. Panaurov understood.


"Mother's worse?" he asked. "Tell me, child: is mother worse?"


He was alarmed and sent for a sledge.


When they got home, Nina Fyodorovna was sitting propped up with
pillows, with a candle in her hand. Her face looked dark and her
eyes were closed. Crowding in the doorway stood the nurse, the cook,
the housemaid, a peasant called Prokofy and a few persons of the
humbler class, who were complete strangers. The nurse was giving
them orders in a whisper, and they did not understand. Inside the
room at the window stood Lida, with a pale and sleepy face, gazing
severely at her mother.


Panaurov took the candle out of Nina Fyodorovna's hand, and, frowning
contemptuously, flung it on the chest of drawers.


"This is awful!" he said, and his shoulders quivered. "Nina, you
must lie down," he said affectionately. "Lie down, dear."


She looked at him, but did not know him. They laid her down on her
back.


When the priest and the doctor, Sergey Borisovitch, arrived, the
servants crossed themselves devoutly and prayed for her.


"What a sad business!" said the doctor thoughtfully, coming out
into the drawing-room. "Why, she was still young--not yet forty."


They heard the loud sobbing of the little girls. Panaurov, with a
pale face and moist eyes, went up to the doctor and said in a faint,
weak voice:


"Do me a favour, my dear fellow. Send a telegram to Moscow. I'm not
equal to it."


The doctor fetched the ink and wrote the following telegram to his
daughter:


"Madame Panaurov died at eight o'clock this evening. Tell your
husband: a mortgaged house for sale in Dvoryansky Street, nine
thousand cash. Auction on twelfth. Advise him not miss opportunity."



IX


Laptev lived in one of the turnings out of Little Dmitrovka. Besides
the big house facing the street, he rented also a two-storey lodge
in the yard at the back of his friend Kotchevoy, a lawyer's assistant
whom all the Laptevs called Kostya, because he had grown up under
their eyes. Facing this lodge stood another, also of two storeys,
inhabited by a French family consisting of a husband and wife and
five daughters.


There was a frost of twenty degrees. The windows were frozen over.
Waking up in the morning, Kostya, with an anxious face, took twenty
drops of a medicine; then, taking two dumb-bells out of the bookcase,
he did gymnastic exercises. He was tall and thin, with big reddish
moustaches; but what was most noticeable in his appearance was the
length of his legs.


Pyotr, a middle-aged peasant in a reefer jacket and cotton breeches
tucked into his high boots, brought in the samovar and made the
tea.


"It's very nice weather now, Konstantin Ivanovitch," he said.


"It is, but I tell you what, brother, it's a pity we can't get on,
you and I, without such exclamations."


Pyotr sighed from politeness.


"What are the little girls doing?" asked Kotchevoy.


"The priest has not come. Alexey Fyodorovitch is giving them their
lesson himself."


Kostya found a spot in the window that was not covered with frost,
and began looking through a field-glass at the windows of the house
where the French family lived.


"There's no seeing," he said.


Meanwhile Alexey Fyodorovitch was giving Sasha and Lida a scripture
lesson below. For the last six weeks they had been living in Moscow,
and were installed with their governess in the lower storey of the
lodge. And three times a week a teacher from a school in the town,
and a priest, came to give them lessons. Sasha was going through
the New Testament and Lida was going through the Old. The time
before Lida had been set the story up to Abraham to learn by heart.


"And so Adam and Eve had two sons," said Laptev. "Very good. But
what were they called? Try to remember them!"


Lida, still with the same severe face, gazed dumbly at the table.
She moved her lips, but without speaking; and the elder girl, Sasha,
looked into her face, frowning.


"You know it very well, only you mustn't be nervous," said Laptev.
"Come, what were Adam's sons called?"


"Abel and Canel," Lida whispered.


"Cain and Abel," Laptev corrected her.


A big tear rolled down Lida's cheek and dropped on the book. Sasha
looked down and turned red, and she, too, was on the point of tears.
Laptev felt a lump in his throat, and was so sorry for them he could
not speak. He got up from the table and lighted a cigarette. At
that moment Kotchevoy came down the stairs with a paper in his hand.
The little girls stood up, and without looking at him, made curtsies.


"For God's sake, Kostya, give them their lessons," said Laptev,
turning to him. "I'm afraid I shall cry, too, and I have to go to
the warehouse before dinner."


"All right."


Alexey Fyodorovitch went away. Kostya, with a very serious face,
sat down to the table and drew the Scripture history towards him.


"Well," he said; "where have you got to?"


"She knows about the Flood," said Sasha.


"The Flood? All right. Let's peg in at the Flood. Fire away about
the Flood." Kostya skimmed through a brief description of the Flood
in the book, and said: "I must remark that there really never was
a flood such as is described here. And there was no such person as
Noah. Some thousands of years before the birth of Christ, there was
an extraordinary inundation of the earth, and that's not only
mentioned in the Jewish Bible, but in the books of other ancient
peoples: the Greeks, the Chaldeans, the Hindoos. But whatever the
inundation may have been, it couldn't have covered the whole earth.
It may have flooded the plains, but the mountains must have remained.
You can read this book, of course, but don't put too much faith in
it."


Tears trickled down Lida's face again. She turned away and suddenly
burst into such loud sobs, that Kostya started and jumped up from
his seat in great confusion.


"I want to go home," she said, "to papa and to nurse."


Sasha cried too. Kostya went upstairs to his own room, and spoke
on the telephone to Yulia Sergeyevna.


"My dear soul," he said, "the little girls are crying again; there's
no doing anything with them."


Yulia Sergeyevna ran across from the big house in her indoor dress,
with only a knitted shawl over her shoulders, and chilled through
by the frost, began comforting the children.


"Do believe me, do believe me," she said in an imploring voice,
hugging first one and then the other. "Your papa's coming to-day;
he has sent a telegram. You're grieving for mother, and I grieve
too. My heart's torn, but what can we do? We must bow to God's
will!"


When they left off crying, she wrapped them up and took them out
for a drive. They stopped near the Iverskoy chapel, put up candles
at the shrine, and, kneeling down, prayed. On the way back they
went in Filippov's, and had cakes sprinkled with poppy-seeds.


The Laptevs had dinner between two and three. Pyotr handed the
dishes. This Pyotr waited on the family, and by day ran to the post,
to the warehouse, to the law courts for Kostya; he spent his evenings
making cigarettes, ran to open the door at night, and before five
o'clock in the morning was up lighting the stoves, and no one knew
where he slept. He was very fond of opening seltzer-water bottles
and did it easily, without a bang and without spilling a drop.


"With God's blessing," said Kostya, drinking off a glass of vodka
before the soup.


At first Yulia Sergeyevna did not like Kostya; his bass voice, his
phrases such as "Landed him one on the beak," "filth," "produce the
samovar," etc., his habit of clinking glasses and making sentimental
speeches, seemed to her trivial. But as she got to know him better,
she began to feel very much at home with him. He was open with her;
he liked talking to her in a low voice in the evening, and even
gave her novels of his own composition to read, though these had
been kept a secret even from such friends as Laptev and Yartsev.
She read these novels and praised them, so that she might not
disappoint him, and he was delighted because he hoped sooner or
later to become a distinguished author.


In his novels he described nothing but country-house life, though
he had only seen the country on rare occasions when visiting friends
at a summer villa, and had only been in a real country-house once
in his life, when he had been to Volokolamsk on law business. He
avoided any love interest as though he were ashamed of it; he put
in frequent descriptions of nature, and in them was fond of using
such expressions as, "the capricious lines of the mountains, the
miraculous forms of the clouds, the harmony of mysterious rhythms
. . . ." His novels had never been published, and this he attributed
to the censorship.


He liked the duties of a lawyer, but yet he considered that his
most important pursuit was not the law but these novels. He believed
that he had a subtle, Ã¦sthetic temperament, and he always had
leanings towards art. He neither sang nor played on any musical
instrument, and was absolutely without an ear for music, but he
attended all the symphony and philharmonic concerts, got up concerts
for charitable objects, and made the acquaintance of singers. . . .


They used to talk at dinner.


"It's a strange thing," said Laptev, "my Fyodor took my breath away
again! He said we must find out the date of the centenary of our
firm, so as to try and get raised to noble rank; and he said it
quite seriously. What can be the matter with him? I confess I begin
to feel worried about him."


They talked of Fyodor, and of its being the fashion nowadays to
adopt some pose or other. Fyodor, for instance, tried to appear
like a plain merchant, though he had ceased to be one; and when the
teacher came from the school, of which old Laptev was the patron,
to ask Fyodor for his salary, the latter changed his voice and
deportment, and behaved with the teacher as though he were some one
in authority.


There was nothing to be done; after dinner they went into the study.
They talked about the decadents, about "The Maid of Orleans," and
Kostya delivered a regular monologue; he fancied that he was very
successful in imitating Ermolova. Then they sat down and played
whist. The little girls had not gone back to the lodge but were
sitting together in one arm-chair, with pale and mournful faces,
and were listening to every noise in the street, wondering whether
it was their father coming. In the evening when it was dark and the
candles were lighted, they felt deeply dejected. The talk over the
whist, the footsteps of Pyotr, the crackling in the fireplace,
jarred on their nerves, and they did not like to look at the fire.
In the evenings they did not want to cry, but they felt strange,
and there was a load on their hearts. They could not understand how
people could talk and laugh when their mother was dead.


"What did you see through the field-glasses today?" Yulia Sergeyevna
asked Kostya.


"Nothing to-day, but yesterday I saw the old Frenchman having his
bath."


At seven o'clock Yulia and Kostya went to the Little Theatre. Laptev
was left with the little girls.


"It's time your father was here," he said, looking at his watch.
"The train must be late."


The children sat in their arm-chair dumb and huddling together like
animals when they are cold, while he walked about the room looking
impatiently at his watch. It was quiet in the house. But just before
nine o'clock some one rang at the bell. Pyotr went to open the door.


Hearing a familiar voice, the children shrieked, burst into sobs,
and ran into the hall. Panaurov was wearing a sumptuous coat of
antelope skin, and his head and moustaches were white with hoar
frost. "In a minute, in a minute," he muttered, while Sasha and
Lida, sobbing and laughing, kissed his cold hands, his hat, his
antelope coat. With the languor of a handsome man spoilt by too
much love, he fondled the children without haste, then went into
the study and said, rubbing his hands:


"I've not come to stay long, my friends. I'm going to Petersburg
to-morrow. They've promised to transfer me to another town."


He was staying at the Dresden Hotel.



X


A friend who was often at the Laptevs' was Ivan Gavrilitch Yartsev.
He was a strong, healthy man with black hair and a clever, pleasant
face. He was considered to be handsome, but of late he had begun
to grow stout, and that rather spoilt his face and figure; another
thing that spoilt him was that he wore his hair cut so close that
the skin showed through.


At the University his tall figure and physical strength had won him
the nickname of "the pounder" among the students. He had taken his
degree with the Laptev brothers in the faculty of philology--then
he went in for science and now had the degree of _magister_ in
chemistry. But he had never given a lecture or even been a demonstrator.
He taught physics and natural history in the modern school, and in
two girls' high schools. He was enthusiastic over his pupils,
especially the girls, and used to maintain that a remarkable
generation was growing up. At home he spent his time studying
sociology and Russian history, as well as chemistry, and he sometimes
published brief notes in the newspapers and magazines, signing them
"Y." When he talked of some botanical or zoological subject, he
spoke like an historian; when he was discussing some historical
question, he approached it as a man of science.


Kish, nicknamed "the eternal student," was also like one of the
family at the Laptevs'. He had been for three years studying medicine.
Then he took up mathematics, and spent two years over each year's
course. His father, a provincial druggist, used to send him forty
roubles a month, to which his mother, without his father's knowledge,
added another ten. And this sum was not only sufficient for his
board and lodging, but even for such luxuries as an overcoat lined
with Polish beaver, gloves, scent, and photographs (he often had
photographs taken of himself and used to distribute them among his
friends). He was neat and demure, slightly bald, with golden
side-whiskers, and he had the air of a man nearly always ready to
oblige. He was always busy looking after other people's affairs.
At one time he would be rushing about with a subscription list; at
another time he would be freezing in the early morning at a ticket
office to buy tickets for ladies of his acquaintance, or at somebody's
request would be ordering a wreath or a bouquet. People simply said
of him: "Kish will go, Kish will do it, Kish will buy it." He was
usually unsuccessful in carrying out his commissions. Reproaches
were showered upon him, people frequently forgot to pay him for the
things he bought, but he simply sighed in hard cases and never
protested. He was never particularly delighted nor disappointed;
his stories were always long and boring; and his jokes invariably
provoked laughter just because they were not funny. Thus, one day,
for instance, intending to make a joke, he said to Pyotr: "Pyotr,
you're not a sturgeon;" and this aroused a general laugh, and he,
too, laughed for a long time, much pleased at having made such a
successful jest. Whenever one of the professors was buried, he
walked in front with the mutes.


Yartsev and Kish usually came in the evening to tea. If the Laptevs
were not going to the theatre or a concert, the evening tea lingered
on till supper. One evening in February the following conversation
took place:


"A work of art is only significant and valuable when there are some
serious social problems contained in its central idea," said Kostya,
looking wrathfully at Yartsev. "If there is in the work a protest
against serfdom, or the author takes up arms against the vulgarity
of aristocratic society, the work is significant and valuable. The
novels that are taken up with 'Ach!' and 'Och!' and 'she loved him,
while he ceased to love her,' I tell you, are worthless, and damn
them all, I say!"


"I agree with you, Konstantin Ivanovitch," said Yulia Sergeyevna.
"One describes a love scene; another, a betrayal; and the third,
meeting again after separation. Are there no other subjects? Why,
there are many people sick, unhappy, harassed by poverty, to whom
reading all that must be distasteful."


It was disagreeable to Laptev to hear his wife, not yet twenty-two,
speaking so seriously and coldly about love. He understood why this
was so.


"If poetry does not solve questions that seem so important," said
Yartsev, "you should turn to works on technical subjects, criminal
law, or finance, read scientific pamphlets. What need is there to
discuss in 'Romeo and Juliet,' liberty of speech, or the disinfecting
of prisons, instead of love, when you can find all that in special
articles and textbooks?"


"That's pushing it to the extreme," Kostya interrupted. "We are not
talking of giants like Shakespeare or Goethe; we are talking of the
hundreds of talented mediocre writers, who would be infinitely more
valuable if they would let love alone, and would employ themselves
in spreading knowledge and humane ideas among the masses."


Kish, lisping and speaking a little through his nose, began telling
the story of a novel he had lately been reading. He spoke
circumstantially and without haste. Three minutes passed, then five,
then ten, and no one could make out what he was talking about, and
his face grew more and more indifferent, and his eyes more and more
blank.


"Kish, do be quick over it," Yulia Sergeyevna could not resist
saying; "it's really agonizing!"


"Shut up, Kish!" Kostya shouted to him.


They all laughed, and Kish with them.


Fyodor came in. Flushing red in patches, he greeted them all in a
nervous flurry, and led his brother away into the study. Of late
he had taken to avoiding the company of more than one person at
once.


"Let the young people laugh, while we speak from the heart in here,"
he said, settling himself in a deep arm-chair at a distance from
the lamp. "It's a long time, my dear brother, since we've seen each
other. How long is it since you were at the warehouse? I think it
must be a week."


"Yes, there's nothing for me to do there. And I must confess that
the old man wearies me."


"Of course, they could get on at the warehouse without you and me,
but one must have some occupation. 'In the sweat of thy brow thou
shalt eat bread,' as it is written. God loves work."


Pyotr brought in a glass of tea on a tray. Fyodor drank it without
sugar, and asked for more. He drank a great deal of tea, and could
get through as many as ten glasses in the evening.


"I tell you what, brother," he said, getting up and going to his
brother. "Laying aside philosophic subtleties, you must get elected
on to the town council, and little by little we will get you on to
the local Board, and then to be an alderman. And as time goes on
--you are a clever man and well-educated--you will be noticed
in Petersburg and asked to go there--active men on the provincial
assemblies and town councils are all the fashion there now--and
before you are fifty you'll be a privy councillor, and have a ribbon
across your shoulders."


Laptev made no answer; he knew that all this--being a privy
councillor and having a ribbon over his shoulder--was what Fyodor
desired for himself, and he did not know what to say.


The brothers sat still and said nothing. Fyodor opened his watch
and for a long, long time gazed into it with strained attention,
as though he wanted to detect the motion of the hand, and the
expression of his face struck Laptev as strange.


They were summoned to supper. Laptev went into the dining-room,
while Fyodor remained in the study. The argument was over and Yartsev
was speaking in the tones of a professor giving a lecture:


"Owing to differences of climate, of energy, of tastes, of age,
equality among men is physically impossible. But civilised man can
make this inequality innocuous, as he has already done with bogs
and bears. A learned man succeeded in making a cat, a mouse, a
falcon, a sparrow, all eat out of one plate; and education, one
must hope, will do the same thing with men. Life continually
progresses, civilisation makes enormous advances before our eyes,
and obviously a time will come when we shall think, for instance,
the present condition of the factory population as absurd as we now
do the state of serfdom, in which girls were exchanged for dogs."


"That won't be for a long while, a very long while," said Kostya,
with a laugh, "not till Rothschild thinks his cellars full of gold
absurd, and till then the workers may bend their backs and die of
hunger. No; that's not it. We mustn't wait for it; we must struggle
for it. Do you suppose because the cat eats out of the same saucer
as the mouse--do you suppose that she is influenced by a sense
of conscious intelligence? Not a bit of it! She's made to do it by
force."


"Fyodor and I are rich; our father's a capitalist, a millionaire.
You will have to struggle with us," said Laptev, rubbing his forehead
with his hand. "Struggle with me is an idea I cannot grasp. I am
rich, but what has money given me so far? What has this power given
me? In what way am I happier than you? My childhood was slavery,
and money did not save me from the birch. When Nina was ill and
died, my money did not help her. If people don't care for me, I
can't make them like me if I spend a hundred million."


"But you can do a great deal of good," said Kish.


"Good, indeed! You spoke to me yesterday of a mathematical man who
is looking for a job. Believe me, I can do as little for him as you
can. I can give money, but that's not what he wants--I asked a
well-known musician to help a poor violinist, and this is what he
answered: 'You apply to me just because you are not a musician
yourself.' In the same way I say to you that you apply for help to
me so confidently because you've never been in the position of a
rich man."


"Why you bring in the comparison with a well-known musician I don't
understand!" said Yulia Sergeyevna, and she flushed crimson. "What
has the well-known musician to do with it!"


Her face was quivering with hatred, and she dropped her eyes to
conceal the feeling. And not only her husband, but all the men
sitting at the table, knew what the look in her face meant.


"What has the well-known musician got to do with it?" she said
slowly. "Why, nothing's easier than helping some one poor."


Silence followed. Pyotr handed the woodcock, but they all refused
it, and ate nothing but salad. Laptev did not remember what he had
said, but it was clear to him that it was not his words that were
hateful, but the fact of his meddling in the conversation at all.


After supper he went into his study; intently, with a beating heart,
expecting further humiliation, he listened to what was going on in
the hall. An argument had sprung up there again. Then Yartsev sat
down to the piano and played a sentimental song. He was a man of
varied accomplishments; he could play and sing, and even perform
conjuring tricks.


"You may please yourselves, my friends, but I'm not going to stay
at home," said Yulia. "We must go somewhere."


They decided to drive out of town, and sent Kish to the merchant's
club to order a three-horse sledge. They did not ask Laptev to go
with them because he did not usually join these expeditions, and
because his brother was sitting with him; but he took it to mean
that his society bored them, and that he was not wanted in their
light-hearted youthful company. And his vexation, his bitter feeling,
was so intense that he almost shed tears. He was positively glad
that he was treated so ungraciously, that he was scorned, that he
was a stupid, dull husband, a money-bag; and it seemed to him, that
he would have been even more glad if his wife were to deceive him
that night with his best friend, and were afterwards to acknowledge
it, looking at him with hatred. . . . He was jealous on her account
of their student friends, of actors, of singers, of Yartsev, even
of casual acquaintances; and now he had a passionate longing for
her really to be unfaithful to him. He longed to find her in another
man's arms, and to be rid of this nightmare forever. Fyodor was
drinking tea, gulping it noisily. But he, too, got up to go.


"Our old father must have got cataract," he said, as he put on his
fur coat. "His sight has become very poor."


Laptev put on his coat, too, and went out. After seeing his brother
part of the way home, he took a sledge and drove to Yar's.


"And this is family happiness!" he said, jeering at himself. "This
is love!"


His teeth were chattering, and he did not know if it were jealousy
or something else. He walked about near the tables; listened to a
comic singer in the hall. He had not a single phrase ready if he
should meet his own party; and he felt sure beforehand that if he
met his wife, he would only smile pitifully and not cleverly, and
that every one would understand what feeling had induced him to
come here. He was bewildered by the electric light, the loud music,
the smell of powder, and the fact that the ladies he met looked at
him. He stood at the doors trying to see and to hear what was going
on in the private rooms, and it seemed to him that he was somehow
playing a mean, contemptible part on a level with the comic singers
and those ladies. Then he went to Strelna, but he found none of his
circle there, either; and only when on the way home he was again
driving up to Yar's, a three-horse sledge noisily overtook him. The
driver was drunk and shouting, and he could hear Yartsev laughing:
"Ha, ha, ha!"


Laptev returned home between three and four. Yulia Sergeyevna was
in bed. Noticing that she was not asleep, he went up to her and
said sharply:


"I understand your repulsion, your hatred, but you might spare me
before other people; you might conceal your feelings."


She got up and sat on the bed with her legs dangling. Her eyes
looked big and black in the lamplight.


"I beg your pardon," she said.


He could not utter a single word from excitement and the trembling
of his whole body; he stood facing her and was dumb. She trembled,
too, and sat with the air of a criminal waiting for explanations.


"How I suffer!" he said at last, and he clutched his head. "I'm in
hell, and I'm out of my mind."


"And do you suppose it's easy for me?" she asked, with a quiver in
her voice. "God alone knows what I go through."


"You've been my wife for six months, but you haven't a spark of
love for me in your heart. There's no hope, not one ray of light!
Why did you marry me?" Laptev went on with despair. "Why? What demon
thrust you into my arms? What did you hope for? What did you want?"


She looked at him with terror, as though she were afraid he would
kill her.


"Did I attract you? Did you like me?" he went on, gasping for breath.
"No. Then what? What? Tell me what?" he cried. "Oh, the cursed
money! The cursed money!"


"I swear to God, no!" she cried, and she crossed herself. She seemed
to shrink under the insult, and for the first time he heard her
crying. "I swear to God, no!" she repeated. "I didn't think about
your money; I didn't want it. I simply thought I should do wrong
if I refused you. I was afraid of spoiling your life and mine. And
now I am suffering for my mistake. I'm suffering unbearably!"


She sobbed bitterly, and he saw that she was hurt; and not knowing
what to say, dropped down on the carpet before her.


"That's enough; that's enough," he muttered. "I insulted you because
I love you madly." He suddenly kissed her foot and passionately
hugged it. "If only a spark of love," he muttered. "Come, lie to
me; tell me a lie! Don't say it's a mistake! . . ."


But she went on crying, and he felt that she was only enduring his
caresses as an inevitable consequence of her mistake. And the foot
he had kissed she drew under her like a bird. He felt sorry for
her.


She got into bed and covered her head over; he undressed and got
into bed, too. In the morning they both felt confused and did not
know what to talk about, and he even fancied she walked unsteadily
on the foot he had kissed.


Before dinner Panaurov came to say good-bye. Yulia had an irresistible
desire to go to her own home; it would be nice, she thought, to go
away and have a rest from married life, from the embarrassment and
the continual consciousness that she had done wrong. It was decided
at dinner that she should set off with Panaurov, and stay with her
father for two or three weeks until she was tired of it.



XI


She travelled with Panaurov in a reserved compartment; he had on
his head an astrachan cap of peculiar shape.


"Yes, Petersburg did not satisfy me," he said, drawling, with a
sigh. "They promise much, but nothing definite. Yes, my dear girl.
I have been a Justice of the Peace, a member of the local Board,
chairman of the Board of Magistrates, and finally councillor of the
provincial administration. I think I have served my country and
have earned the right to receive attention; but--would you believe
it?--I can never succeed in wringing from the authorities a post
in another town. . . ."


Panaurov closed his eyes and shook his head.


"They don't recognise me," he went on, as though dropping asleep.
"Of course I'm not an administrator of genius, but, on the other
hand, I'm a decent, honest man, and nowadays even that's something
rare. I regret to say I have not been always quite straightforward
with women, but in my relations with the Russian government I've
always been a gentleman. But enough of that," he said, opening his
eyes; "let us talk of you. What put it into your head to visit your
papa so suddenly?"


"Well. . . . I had a little misunderstanding with my husband," said
Yulia, looking at his cap.


"Yes. What a queer fellow he is! All the Laptevs are queer. Your
husband's all right--he's nothing out of the way, but his brother
Fyodor is a perfect fool."


Panaurov sighed and asked seriously:


"And have you a lover yet?"


Yulia looked at him in amazement and laughed.


"Goodness knows what you're talking about."


It was past ten o'clock when they got out at a big station and had
supper. When the train went on again Panaurov took off his greatcoat
and his cap, and sat down beside Yulia.


"You are very charming, I must tell you," he began. "Excuse me for
the eating-house comparison, but you remind me of fresh salted
cucumber; it still smells of the hotbed, so to speak, and yet has
a smack of the salt and a scent of fennel about it. As time goes
on you will make a magnificent woman, a wonderful, exquisite woman.
If this trip of ours had happened five years ago," he sighed, "I
should have felt it my duty to join the ranks of your adorers, but
now, alas, I'm a veteran on the retired list."


He smiled mournfully, but at the same time graciously, and put his
arm round her waist.


"You must be mad!" she said; she flushed crimson and was so frightened
that her hands and feet turned cold.


"Leave off, Grigory Nikolaevitch!"


"What are you afraid of, dear?" he asked softly. "What is there
dreadful about it? It's simply that you're not used to it."


If a woman protested he always interpreted it as a sign that he had
made an impression on her and attracted her. Holding Yulia round
the waist, he kissed her firmly on the cheek, then on the lips, in
the full conviction that he was giving her intense gratification.
Yulia recovered from her alarm and confusion, and began laughing.
He kissed her once more and said, as he put on his ridiculous cap:


"That is all that the old veteran can give you. A Turkish Pasha, a
kind-hearted old fellow, was presented by some one--or inherited,
I fancy it was--a whole harem. When his beautiful young wives
drew up in a row before him, he walked round them, kissed each one
of them, and said: 'That is all that I am equal to giving you.' And
that's just what I say, too."


All this struck her as stupid and extraordinary, and amused her.
She felt mischievous. Standing up on the seat and humming, she got
a box of sweets from the shelf, and throwing him a piece of chocolate,
shouted:


"Catch!"


He caught it. With a loud laugh she threw him another sweet, then
a third, and he kept catching them and putting them into his mouth,
looking at her with imploring eyes; and it seemed to her that in
his face, his features, his expression, there was a great deal that
was feminine and childlike. And when, out of breath, she sat down
on the seat and looked at him, laughing, he tapped her cheek with
two fingers, and said as though he were vexed:


"Naughty girl!"


"Take it," she said, giving him the box. "I don't care for sweet
things."


He ate up the sweets--every one of them, and locked the empty box
in his trunk; he liked boxes with pictures on them.


"That's mischief enough, though," he said. "It's time for the veteran
to go bye-bye."


He took out of his hold-all a Bokhara dressing-gown and a pillow,
lay down, and covered himself with the dressing-gown.


"Good-night, darling!" he said softly, and sighed as though his
whole body ached.


And soon a snore was heard. Without the slightest feeling of
constraint, she, too, lay down and went to sleep.


When next morning she drove through her native town from the station
homewards, the streets seemed to her empty and deserted. The snow
looked grey, and the houses small, as though some one had squashed
them. She was met by a funeral procession: the dead body was carried
in an open coffin with banners.


"Meeting a funeral, they say, is lucky," she thought.


There were white bills pasted in the windows of the house where
Nina Fyodorovna used to live.


With a sinking at her heart she drove into her own courtyard and
rang at the door. It was opened by a servant she did not know--a
plump, sleepy-looking girl wearing a warm wadded jacket. As she
went upstairs Yulia remembered how Laptev had declared his love
there, but now the staircase was unscrubbed, covered with foot-marks.
Upstairs in the cold passage patients were waiting in their out-door
coats. And for some reason her heart beat violently, and she was
so excited she could scarcely walk.


The doctor, who had grown even stouter, was sitting with a brick-red
face and dishevelled hair, drinking tea. Seeing his daughter, he
was greatly delighted, and even lacrymose. She thought that she was
the only joy in this old man's life, and much moved, she embraced
him warmly, and told him she would stay a long time--till Easter.
After taking off her things in her own room, she went back to the
dining-room to have tea with him. He was pacing up and down with
his hands in his pockets, humming, "Ru-ru-ru"; this meant that he
was dissatisfied with something.


"You have a gay time of it in Moscow," he said. "I am very glad for
your sake. . . . I'm an old man and I need nothing. I shall soon
give up the ghost and set you all free. And the wonder is that my
hide is so tough, that I'm alive still! It's amazing!"


He said that he was a tough old ass that every one rode on. They
had thrust on him the care of Nina Fyodorovna, the worry of her
children, and of her burial; and that coxcomb Panaurov would not
trouble himself about it, and had even borrowed a hundred roubles
from him and had never paid it back.


"Take me to Moscow and put me in a madhouse," said the doctor. "I'm
mad; I'm a simple child, as I still put faith in truth and justice."


Then he found fault with her husband for his short-sightedness in
not buying houses that were being sold so cheaply. And now it seemed
to Yulia that she was not the one joy in this old man's life. While
he was seeing his patients, and afterwards going his rounds, she
walked through all the rooms, not knowing what to do or what to
think about. She had already grown strange to her own town and her
own home. She felt no inclination to go into the streets or see her
friends; and at the thought of her old friends and her life as a
girl, she felt no sadness nor regret for the past.


In the evening she dressed a little more smartly and went to the
evening service. But there were only poor people in the church, and
her splendid fur coat and hat made no impression. And it seemed to
her that there was some change in the church as well as in herself.
In old days she had loved it when they read the prayers for the day
at evening service, and the choir sang anthems such as "I will open
my lips." She liked moving slowly in the crowd to the priest who
stood in the middle of the church, and then to feel the holy oil
on her forehead; now she only waited for the service to be over.
And now, going out of the church, she was only afraid that beggars
would ask for alms; it was such a bore to have to stop and feel for
her pockets; besides, she had no coppers in her pocket now--nothing
but roubles.


She went to bed early, and was a long time in going to sleep. She
kept dreaming of portraits of some sort, and of the funeral procession
she had met that morning. The open coffin with the dead body was
carried into the yard, and brought to a standstill at the door;
then the coffin was swung backwards and forwards on a sheet, and
dashed violently against the door. Yulia woke and jumped up in
alarm. There really was a bang at the door, and the wire of the
bell rustled against the wall, though no ring was to be heard.


The doctor coughed. Then she heard the servant go downstairs, and
then come back.


"Madam!" she said, and knocked at the door. "Madam!"


"What is it?" said Yulia.


"A telegram for you!"


Yulia went out to her with a candle. Behind the servant stood the
doctor, in his night-clothes and greatcoat, and he, too, had a
candle in his hand. "Our bell is broken," he said, yawning sleepily.
"It ought to have been mended long ago."


Yulia broke open the telegram and read:


"We drink to your health.--YARTSEV, KOTCHEVOY."


"Ah, what idiots!" she said, and burst out laughing; and her heart
felt light and gay.


Going back into her room, she quietly washed and dressed, then she
spent a long time in packing her things, until it was daylight, and
at midday she set off for Moscow.



XII


In Holy Week the Laptevs went to an exhibition of pictures in the
school of painting. The whole family went together in the Moscow
fashion, the little girls, the governess, Kostya, and all.


Laptev knew the names of all the well-known painters, and never
missed an exhibition. He used sometimes to paint little landscape
paintings when he was in the country in the summer, and he fancied
he had a good deal of taste, and that if he had studied he might
have made a good painter. When he was abroad he sometimes used to
go to curio shops, examining the antiques with the air of a connoisseur
and giving his opinion on them. When he bought any article he gave
just what the shopkeeper liked to ask for it and his purchase
remained afterwards in a box in the coach-house till it disappeared
altogether. Or going into a print shop, he would slowly and attentively
examine the engravings and the bronzes, making various remarks on
them, and would buy a common frame or a box of wretched prints. At
home he had pictures always of large dimensions but of inferior
quality; the best among them were badly hung. It had happened to
him more than once to pay large sums for things which had afterwards
turned out to be forgeries of the grossest kind. And it was remarkable
that, though as a rule timid in the affairs of life, he was exceedingly
bold and self-confident at a picture exhibition. Why?


Yulia Sergeyevna looked at the pictures as her husband did, through
her open fist or an opera-glass, and was surprised that the people
in the pictures were like live people, and the trees like real
trees. But she did not understand art, and it seemed to her that
many pictures in the exhibition were alike, and she imagined that
the whole object in painting was that the figures and objects should
stand out as though they were real, when you looked at the picture
through your open fist.


"That forest is Shiskin's," her husband explained to her. "He always
paints the same thing. . . . But notice snow's never such a lilac
colour as that. . . . And that boy's left arm is shorter than his
right."


When they were all tired and Laptev had gone to look for Kostya,
that they might go home, Yulia stopped indifferently before a small
landscape. In the foreground was a stream, over it a little wooden
bridge; on the further side a path that disappeared in the dark
grass; a field on the right; a copse; near it a camp fire--no
doubt of watchers by night; and in the distance there was a glow
of the evening sunset.


Yulia imagined walking herself along the little bridge, and then
along the little path further and further, while all round was
stillness, the drowsy landrails calling and the fire flickering in
the distance. And for some reason she suddenly began to feel that
she had seen those very clouds that stretched across the red part
of the sky, and that copse, and that field before, many times before.
She felt lonely, and longed to walk on and on along the path; and
there, in the glow of sunset was the calm reflection of something
unearthly, eternal.


"How finely that's painted!" she said, surprised that the picture
had suddenly become intelligible to her.


"Look, Alyosha! Do you see how peaceful it is?"


She began trying to explain why she liked the landscape so much,
but neither Kostya nor her husband understood her. She kept looking
at the picture with a mournful smile, and the fact that the others
saw nothing special in it troubled her. Then she began walking
through the rooms and looking at the pictures again. She tried to
understand them and no longer thought that a great many of them
were alike. When, on returning home, for the first time she looked
attentively at the big picture that hung over the piano in the
drawing-room, she felt a dislike for it, and said:


"What an idea to have pictures like that!"


And after that the gilt cornices, the Venetian looking-glasses with
flowers on them, the pictures of the same sort as the one that hung
over the piano, and also her husband's and Kostya's reflections
upon art, aroused in her a feeling of dreariness and vexation, even
of hatred.


Life went on its ordinary course from day to day with no promise
of anything special. The theatrical season was over, the warm days
had come. There was a long spell of glorious weather. One morning
the Laptevs attended the district court to hear Kostya, who had
been appointed by the court to defend some one. They were late in
starting, and reached the court after the examination of the witnesses
had begun. A soldier in the reserve was accused of theft and
housebreaking. There were a great number of witnesses, washerwomen;
they all testified that the accused was often in the house of their
employer--a woman who kept a laundry. At the Feast of the Exaltation
of the Cross he came late in the evening and began asking for money;
he wanted a pick-me-up, as he had been drinking, but no one gave
him anything. Then he went away, but an hour afterwards he came
back, and brought with him some beer and a soft gingerbread cake
for the little girl. They drank and sang songs almost till daybreak,
and when in the morning they looked about, the lock of the door
leading up into the attic was broken, and of the linen three men's
shirts, a petticoat, and two sheets were missing. Kostya asked each
witness sarcastically whether she had not drunk the beer the accused
had brought. Evidently he was insinuating that the washerwomen had
stolen the linen themselves. He delivered his speech without the
slightest nervousness, looking angrily at the jury.


He explained what robbery with housebreaking meant, and the difference
between that and simple theft. He spoke very circumstantially and
convincingly, displaying an unusual talent for speaking at length
and in a serious tone about what had been know to every one long
before. And it was difficult to make out exactly what he was aiming
at. From his long speech the foreman of the jury could only have
deduced "that it was housebreaking but not robbery, as the washerwomen
had sold the linen for drink themselves; or, if there had been
robbery, there had not been housebreaking." But obviously, he said
just what was wanted, as his speech moved the jury and the audience,
and was very much liked. When they gave a verdict of acquittal,
Yulia nodded to Kostya, and afterwards pressed his hand warmly.


In May the Laptevs moved to a country villa at Sokolniki. By that
time Yulia was expecting a baby.



XIII


More than a year had passed. Yulia and Yartsev were lying on the
grass at Sokolniki not far from the embankment of the Yaroslav
railway; a little distance away Kotchevoy was lying with hands under
his head, looking at the sky. All three had been for a walk, and
were waiting for the six o'clock train to pass to go home to tea.


"Mothers see something extraordinary in their children, that is
ordained by nature," said Yulia. "A mother will stand for hours
together by the baby's cot looking at its little ears and eyes and
nose, and fascinated by them. If any one else kisses her baby the
poor thing imagines that it gives him immense pleasure. And a mother
talks of nothing but her baby. I know that weakness in mothers, and
I keep watch over myself, but my Olga really is exceptional. How
she looks at me when I'm nursing her! How she laughs! She's only
eight months old, but, upon my word, I've never seen such intelligent
eyes in a child of three."


"Tell me, by the way," asked Yartsev: "which do you love most--
your husband or your baby?"


Yulia shrugged her shoulders.


"I don't know," she said. "I never was so very fond of my husband,
and Olga is in reality my first love. You know that I did not marry
Alexey for love. In old days I was foolish and miserable, and thought
that I had ruined my life and his, and now I see that love is not
necessary--that it is all nonsense."


"But if it is not love, what feeling is it that binds you to your
husband? Why do you go on living with him?"


"I don't know. . . . I suppose it must be habit. I respect him, I
miss him when he's away for long, but that's--not love. He is a
clever, honest man, and that's enough to make me happy. He is very
kind and good-hearted. . . ."


"Alyosha's intelligent, Alyosha's good," said Kostya, raising his
head lazily; "but, my dear girl, to find out that he is intelligent,
good, and interesting, you have to eat a hundredweight of salt with
him. . . . And what's the use of his goodness and intelligence? He
can fork out money as much as you want, but when character is needed
to resist insolence or aggressiveness, he is faint-hearted and
overcome with nervousness. People like your amiable Alyosha are
splendid people, but they are no use at all for fighting. In fact,
they are no use for anything."


At last the train came in sight. Coils of perfectly pink smoke from
the funnels floated over the copse, and two windows in the last
compartment flashed so brilliantly in the sun, that it hurt their
eyes to look at it.


"Tea-time!" said Yulia Sergeyevna, getting up.


She had grown somewhat stouter of late, and her movements were
already a little matronly, a little indolent.


"It's bad to be without love though," said Yartsev, walking behind
her. "We talk and read of nothing else but love, but we do very
little loving ourselves, and that's really bad."


"All that's nonsense, Ivan Gavrilitch," said Yulia. "That's not
what gives happiness."


They had tea in the little garden, where mignonette, stocks, and
tobacco plants were in flower, and spikes of early gladiolus were
just opening. Yartsev and Kotchevoy could see from Yulia's face
that she was passing through a happy period of inward peace and
serenity, that she wanted nothing but what she had, and they, too,
had a feeling of peace and comfort in their hearts. Whatever was
said sounded apt and clever; the pines were lovely--the fragrance
of them was exquisite as it had never been before; and the cream
was very nice; and Sasha was a good, intelligent child.


After tea Yartsev sang songs, accompanying himself on the piano,
while Yulia and Kotchevoy sat listening in silence, though Yulia
got up from time to time, and went softly indoors, to take a look
at the baby and at Lida, who had been in bed for the last two days
feverish and eating nothing.


"My friend, my tender friend," sang Yartsev. "No, my friends, I'll
be hanged if I understand why you are all so against love!" he said,
flinging back his head. "If I weren't busy for fifteen hours of the
twenty-four, I should certainly fall in love."


Supper was served on the verandah; it was warm and still, but Yulia
wrapped herself in a shawl and complained of the damp. When it got
dark, she seemed not quite herself; she kept shivering and begging
her visitors to stay a little longer. She regaled them with wine,
and after supper ordered brandy to keep them from going. She didn't
want to be left alone with the children and the servants.


"We summer visitors are getting up a performance for the children,"
she said. "We have got everything--a stage and actors; we are
only at a loss for a play. Two dozen plays of different sorts have
been sent us, but there isn't one that is suitable. Now, you are
fond of the theatre, and are so good at history," she said, addressing
Yartsev. "Write an historical play for us."


"Well, I might."


The men drank up all the brandy, and prepared to go.


It was past ten, and for summer-villa people that was late.


"How dark it is! One can't see a bit," said Yulia, as she went with
them to the gate. "I don't know how you'll find your way. But, isn't
it cold?"


She wrapped herself up more closely and walked back to the porch.


"I suppose my Alexey's playing cards somewhere," she called to them.
"Good-night!"


After the lighted rooms nothing could be seen. Yartsev and Kostya
groped their way like blind men to the railway embankment and crossed
it.


"One can't see a thing," said Kostya in his bass voice, standing
still and gazing at the sky. "And the stars, the stars, they are
like new three-penny-bits. Gavrilitch!"


"Ah?" Yartsev responded somewhere in the darkness.


"I say, one can't see a thing. Where are you?"


Yartsev went up to him whistling, and took his arm.


"Hi, there, you summer visitors!" Kostya shouted at the top of his
voice. "We've caught a socialist."


When he was exhilarated he was always very rowdy, shouting, wrangling
with policemen and cabdrivers, singing, and laughing violently.


"Nature be damned," he shouted.


"Come, come," said Yartsev, trying to pacify him. "You mustn't.
Please don't."


Soon the friends grew accustomed to the darkness, and were able to
distinguish the outlines of the tall pines and telegraph posts.
From time to time the sound of whistles reached them from the station
and the telegraph wires hummed plaintively. From the copse itself
there came no sound, and there was a feeling of pride, strength,
and mystery in its silence, and on the right it seemed that the
tops of the pines were almost touching the sky. The friends found
their path and walked along it. There it was quite dark, and it was
only from the long strip of sky dotted with stars, and from the
firmly trodden earth under their feet, that they could tell they
were walking along a path. They walked along side by side in silence,
and it seemed to both of them that people were coming to meet them.
Their tipsy exhilaration passed off. The fancy came into Yartsev's
mind that perhaps that copse was haunted by the spirits of the
Muscovite Tsars, boyars, and patriarchs, and he was on the point
of telling Kostya about it, but he checked himself.


When they reached the town gate there was a faint light of dawn in
the sky. Still in silence, Yartsev and Kotchevoy walked along the
wooden pavement, by the cheap summer cottages, eating-houses,
timber-stacks. Under the arch of interlacing branches, the damp air
was fragrant of lime-trees, and then a broad, long street opened
before them, and on it not a soul, not a light. . . . When they
reached the Red Pond, it was daylight.


"Moscow--it's a town that will have to suffer a great deal more,"
said Yartsev, looking at the Alexyevsky Monastery.


"What put that into your head?"


"I don't know. I love Moscow."


Both Yartsev and Kostya had been born in Moscow, and adored the
town, and felt for some reason antagonistic to every other town.
Both were convinced that Moscow was a remarkable town, and Russia
a remarkable country. In the Crimea, in the Caucasus, and abroad,
they felt dull, uncomfortable, and ill at ease, and they thought
their grey Moscow weather very pleasant and healthy. And when the
rain lashed at the window-panes and it got dark early, and when the
walls of the churches and houses looked a drab, dismal colour, days
when one doesn't know what to put on when one is going out--such
days excited them agreeably.


At last near the station they took a cab.


"It really would be nice to write an historical play," said Yartsev,
"but not about the Lyapunovs or the Godunovs, but of the times of
Yaroslav or of Monomach. . . . I hate all historical plays except
the monologue of Pimen. When you have to do with some historical
authority or even read a textbook of Russian history, you feel that
every one in Russia is exceptionally talented, gifted, and interesting;
but when I see an historical play at the theatre, Russian life
begins to seem stupid, morbid, and not original."


Near Dmitrovka the friends separated, and Yartsev went on to his
lodging in Nikitsky Street. He sat half dozing, swaying from side
to side, and pondering on the play. He suddenly imagined a terrible
din, a clanging noise, and shouts in some unknown language, that
might have been Kalmuck, and a village wrapped in flames, and forests
near covered with hoarfrost and soft pink in the glow of the fire,
visible for miles around, and so clearly that every little fir-tree
could be distinguished, and savage men darting about the village
on horseback and on foot, and as red as the glow in the sky.


"The Polovtsy," thought Yartsev.


One of them, a terrible old man with a bloodstained face all scorched
from the fire, binds to his saddle a young girl with a white Russian
face, and the girl looks sorrowful, understanding. Yartsev flung
back his head and woke up.


"My friend, my tender friend . . ." he hummed.


As he paid the cabman and went up his stairs, he could not shake
off his dreaminess; he saw the flames catching the village, and the
forest beginning to crackle and smoke. A huge, wild bear frantic
with terror rushed through the village. . . . And the girl tied to
the saddle was still looking.


When at last he went into his room it was broad daylight. Two candles
were burning by some open music on the piano. On the sofa lay Polina
Razsudin wearing a black dress and a sash, with a newspaper in her
hand, fast asleep. She must have been playing late, waiting for
Yartsev to come home, and, tired of waiting, fell asleep.


"Hullo, she's worn out," he thought.


Carefully taking the newspaper out of her hands, he covered her
with a rug. He put out the candles and went into his bedroom. As
he got into bed, he still thought of his historical play, and the
tune of "My friend, my tender friend" was still ringing in his
head. . . .


Two days later Laptev looked in upon him for a moment to tell him
that Lida was ill with diphtheria, and that Yulia Sergeyevna and
her baby had caught it from her, and five days later came the news
that Lida and Yulia were recovering, but the baby was dead, and
that the Laptevs had left their villa at Sokolniki and had hastened
back to Moscow.



XIV


It had become distasteful to Laptev to be long at home. His wife
was constantly away in the lodge declaring that she had to look
after the little girls, but he knew that she did not go to the lodge
to give them lessons but to cry in Kostya's room. The ninth day
came, then the twentieth, and then the fortieth, and still he had
to go to the cemetery to listen to the requiem, and then to wear
himself out for a whole day and night thinking of nothing but that
unhappy baby, and trying to comfort his wife with all sorts of
commonplace expressions. He went rarely to the warehouse now, and
spent most of his time in charitable work, seizing upon every pretext
requiring his attention, and he was glad when he had for some trivial
reason to be out for the whole day. He had been intending of late
to go abroad, to study night-refuges, and that idea attracted him
now.


It was an autumn day. Yulia had just gone to the lodge to cry, while
Laptev lay on a sofa in the study thinking where he could go. Just
at that moment Pyotr announced Polina Razsudin. Laptev was delighted;
he leapt up and went to meet the unexpected visitor, who had been
his closest friend, though he had almost begun to forget her. She
had not changed in the least since that evening when he had seen
her for the last time, and was just the same as ever.


"Polina," he said, holding out both hands to her. "What ages! If
you only knew how glad I am to see you! Do come in!"


Polina greeted him, jerked him by the hand, and without taking off
her coat and hat, went into the study and sat down.


"I've come to you for one minute," she said. "I haven't time to
talk of any nonsense. Sit down and listen. Whether you are glad to
see me or not is absolutely nothing to me, for I don't care a straw
for the gracious attentions of you lords of creation. I've only
come to you because I've been to five other places already to-day,
and everywhere I was met with a refusal, and it's a matter that
can't be put off. Listen," she went on, looking into his face. "Five
students of my acquaintance, stupid, unintelligent people, but
certainly poor, have neglected to pay their fees, and are being
excluded from the university. Your wealth makes it your duty to go
straight to the university and pay for them."


"With pleasure, Polina."


"Here are their names," she said, giving him a list. "Go this minute;
you'll have plenty of time to enjoy your domestic happiness
afterwards."


At that moment a rustle was heard through the door that led into
the drawing-room; probably the dog was scratching itself. Polina
turned crimson and jumped up.


"Your Dulcinea's eavesdropping," she said. "That's horrid!"


Laptev was offended at this insult to Yulia.


"She's not here; she's in the lodge," he said. "And don't speak of
her like that. Our child is dead, and she is in great distress."


"You can console her," Polina scoffed, sitting down again; "she'll
have another dozen. You don't need much sense to bring children
into the world."


Laptev remembered that he had heard this, or something very like
it, many times in old days, and it brought back a whiff of the
romance of the past, of solitary freedom, of his bachelor life,
when he was young and thought he could do anything he chose, when
he had neither love for his wife nor memory of his baby.


"Let us go together," he said, stretching.


When they reached the university Polina waited at the gate, while
Laptev went into the office; he came back soon afterwards and handed
Polina five receipts.


"Where are you going now?" he asked.


"To Yartsev's."


"I'll come with you."


"But you'll prevent him from writing."


"No, I assure you I won't," he said, and looked at her imploringly.


She had on a black hat trimmed with crape, as though she were in
mourning, and a short, shabby coat, the pockets of which stuck out.
Her nose looked longer than it used to be, and her face looked
bloodless in spite of the cold. Laptev liked walking with her, doing
what she told him, and listening to her grumbling. He walked along
thinking about her, what inward strength there must be in this
woman, since, though she was so ugly, so angular, so restless,
though she did not know how to dress, and always had untidy hair,
and was always somehow out of harmony, she was yet so fascinating.


They went into Yartsev's flat by the back way through the kitchen,
where they were met by the cook, a clean little old woman with grey
curls; she was overcome with embarrassment, and with a honeyed smile
which made her little face look like a pie, said:


"Please walk in."


Yartsev was not at home. Polina sat down to the piano, and beginning
upon a tedious, difficult exercise, told Laptev not to hinder her.
And without distracting her attention by conversation, he sat on
one side and began turning over the pages of a "The Messenger of
Europe." After practising for two hours--it was the task she set
herself every day--she ate something in the kitchen and went out
to her lessons. Laptev read the continuation of a story, then sat
for a long time without reading and without being bored, glad to
think that he was too late for dinner at home.


"Ha, ha, ha!" came Yartsev's laugh, and he walked in with ruddy
cheeks, looking strong and healthy, wearing a new coat with bright
buttons. "Ha, ha, ha!"


The friends dined together. Then Laptev lay on the sofa while Yartsev
sat near and lighted a cigar. It got dark.


"I must be getting old," said Laptev. "Ever since my sister Nina
died, I've taken to constantly thinking of death."


They began talking of death, of the immortality of the soul, of how
nice it would be to rise again and fly off somewhere to Mars, to
be always idle and happy, and, above all, to think in a new special
way, not as on earth.


"One doesn't want to die," said Yartsev softly. "No sort of philosophy
can reconcile me to death, and I look on it simply as annihilation.
One wants to live."


"You love life, Gavrilitch?"


"Yes, I love it."


"Do you know, I can never understand myself about that. I'm always
in a gloomy mood or else indifferent. I'm timid, without self-confidence;
I have a cowardly conscience; I never can adapt myself to life, or
become its master. Some people talk nonsense or cheat, and even so
enjoy life, while I consciously do good, and feel nothing but
uneasiness or complete indifference. I explain all that, Gavrilitch,
by my being a slave, the grandson of a serf. Before we plebeians
fight our way into the true path, many of our sort will perish on
the way."


"That's all quite right, my dear fellow," said Yartsev, and he
sighed. "That only proves once again how rich and varied Russian
life is. Ah, how rich it is! Do you know, I feel more convinced
every day that we are on the eve of the greatest triumph, and I
should like to live to take part in it. Whether you like to believe
it or not, to my thinking a remarkable generation is growing up.
It gives me great enjoyment to teach the children, especially the
girls. They are wonderful children!"


Yartsev went to the piano and struck a chord.


"I'm a chemist, I think in chemical terms, and I shall die a chemist,"
he went on. "But I am greedy, and I am afraid of dying unsatisfied;
and chemistry is not enough for me, and I seize upon Russian history,
history of art, the science of teaching music. . . . Your wife asked
me in the summer to write an historical play, and now I'm longing
to write and write. I feel as though I could sit for three days and
three nights without moving, writing all the time. I am worn out
with ideas--my brain's crowded with them, and I feel as though
there were a pulse throbbing in my head. I don't in the least want
to become anything special, to create something great. I simply
want to live, to dream, to hope, to be in the midst of everything
. . . . Life is short, my dear fellow, and one must make the most of
everything."


After this friendly talk, which was not over till midnight, Laptev
took to coming to see Yartsev almost every day. He felt drawn to
him. As a rule he came towards evening, lay down on the sofa, and
waited patiently for Yartsev to come in, without feeling in the
least bored. When Yartsev came back from his work, he had dinner,
and sat down to work; but Laptev would ask him a question, a
conversation would spring up, and there was no more thought of work
and at midnight the friends parted very well pleased with one
another.


But this did not last long. Arriving one day at Yartsev's, Laptev
found no one there but Polina, who was sitting at the piano practising
her exercises. She looked at him with a cold, almost hostile
expression, and asked without shaking hands:


"Tell me, please: how much longer is this going on?"


"This? What?" asked Laptev, not understanding.


"You come here every day and hinder Yartsev from working. Yartsev
is not a tradesman; he is a scientific man, and every moment of his
life is precious. You ought to understand and to have some little
delicacy!"


"If you think that I hinder him," said Laptev, mildly, disconcerted,
"I will give up my visits."


"Quite right, too. You had better go, or he may be home in a minute
and find you here."


The tone in which this was said, and the indifference in Polina's
eyes, completely disconcerted him. She had absolutely no sort of
feeling for him now, except the desire that he should go as soon
as possible--and what a contrast it was to her old love for him!
He went out without shaking hands with her, and he fancied she would
call out to him, bring him back, but he heard the scales again, and
as he slowly went down the stairs he realised that he had become a
stranger to her now.


Three days later Yartsev came to spend the evening with him.


"I have news," he said, laughing. "Polina Nikolaevna has moved into
my rooms altogether." He was a little confused, and went on in a
low voice: "Well, we are not in love with each other, of course,
but I suppose that . . . that doesn't matter. I am glad I can give
her a refuge and peace and quiet, and make it possible for her not
to work if she's ill. She fancies that her coming to live with me
will make things more orderly, and that under her influence I shall
become a great scientist. That's what she fancies. And let her fancy
it. In the South they have a saying: 'Fancy makes the fool a rich
man.' Ha, ha, ha!"


Laptev said nothing. Yartsev walked up and down the study, looking
at the pictures he had seen so many times before, and said with a
sigh:


"Yes, my dear fellow, I am three years older than you are, and it's
too late for me to think of real love, and in reality a woman like
Polina Nikolaevna is a godsend to me, and, of course, I shall get
on capitally with her till we're both old people; but, goodness
knows why, one still regrets something, one still longs for something,
and I still feel as though I am lying in the Vale of Daghestan and
dreaming of a ball. In short, man's never satisfied with what he
has."


He went into the drawing-room and began singing as though nothing
had happened, and Laptev sat in his study with his eyes shut, and
tried to understand why Polina had gone to live with Yartsev. And
then he felt sad that there were no lasting, permanent attachments.
And he felt vexed that Polina Nikolaevna had gone to live with
Yartsev, and vexed with himself that his feeling for his wife was
not what it had been.



XV


Laptev sat reading and swaying to and fro in a rocking-chair; Yulia
was in the study, and she, too, was reading. It seemed there was
nothing to talk about; they had both been silent all day. From time
to time he looked at her from over his book and thought: "Whether
one marries from passionate love, or without love at all, doesn't
it come to the same thing?" And the time when he used to be jealous,
troubled, distressed, seemed to him far away. He had succeeded in
going abroad, and now he was resting after the journey and looking
forward to another visit in the spring to England, which he had
very much liked.


And Yulia Sergeyevna had grown used to her sorrow, and had left off
going to the lodge to cry. That winter she had given up driving out
shopping, had given up the theatres and concerts, and had stayed
at home. She never cared for big rooms, and always sat in her
husband's study or in her own room, where she had shrines of ikons
that had come to her on her marriage, and where there hung on the
wall the landscape that had pleased her so much at the exhibition.
She spent hardly any money on herself, and was almost as frugal now
as she had been in her father's house.


The winter passed cheerlessly. Card-playing was the rule everywhere
in Moscow, and if any other recreation was attempted, such as
singing, reading, drawing, the result was even more tedious. And
since there were few talented people in Moscow, and the same singers
and reciters performed at every entertainment, even the enjoyment
of art gradually palled and became for many people a tiresome and
monotonous social duty.


Moreover, the Laptevs never had a day without something vexatious
happening. Old Laptev's eyesight was failing; he no longer went to
the warehouse, and the oculist told them that he would soon be
blind. Fyodor had for some reason given up going to the warehouse
and spent his time sitting at home writing something. Panaurov had
got a post in another town, and had been promoted an actual civil
councillor, and was now staying at the Dresden. He came to the
Laptevs' almost every day to ask for money. Kish had finished his
studies at last, and while waiting for Laptev to find him a job,
used to spend whole days at a time with them, telling them long,
tedious stories. All this was irritating and exhausting, and made
daily life unpleasant.


Pyotr came into the study, and announced an unknown lady. On the
card he brought in was the name "Josephina Iosefovna Milan."


Yulia Sergeyevna got up languidly and went out limping slightly,
as her foot had gone to sleep. In the doorway appeared a pale, thin
lady with dark eyebrows, dressed altogether in black. She clasped
her hands on her bosom and said supplicatingly:


"M. Laptev, save my children!"


The jingle of her bracelets sounded familiar to him, and he knew
the face with patches of powder on it; he recognised her as the
lady with whom he had once so inappropriately dined before his
marriage. It was Panaurov's second wife.


"Save my children," she repeated, and her face suddenly quivered
and looked old and pitiful. "You alone can save us, and I have spent
my last penny coming to Moscow to see you! My children are starving!"


She made a motion as though she were going to fall on her knees.
Laptev was alarmed, and clutched her by the arm.


"Sit down, sit down . . ." he muttered, making her sit down. "I beg
you to be seated."


"We have no money to buy bread," she said. "Grigory Nikolaevitch
is going away to a new post, but he will not take the children and
me with him, and the money which you so generously send us he spends
only on himself. What are we to do? What? My poor, unhappy children!"


"Calm yourself, I beg. I will give orders that that money shall be
made payable to you."


She began sobbing, and then grew calmer, and he noticed that the
tears had made little pathways through the powder on her cheeks,
and that she was growing a moustache.


"You are infinitely generous, M. Laptev. But be our guardian angel,
our good fairy, persuade Grigory Nikolaevitch not to abandon me,
but to take me with him. You know I love him--I love him insanely;
he's the comfort of my life."


Laptev gave her a hundred roubles, and promised to talk to Panaurov,
and saw her out to the hall in trepidation the whole time, for fear
she should break into sobs or fall on her knees.


After her, Kish made his appearance. Then Kostya came in with his
photographic apparatus. Of late he had been attracted by photography
and took photographs of every one in the house several times a day.
This new pursuit caused him many disappointments, and he had actually
grown thinner.


Before evening tea Fyodor arrived. Sitting in a corner in the study,
he opened a book and stared for a long time at a page, obviously
not reading. Then he spent a long time drinking tea; his face turned
red. In his presence Laptev felt a load on his heart; even his
silence was irksome to him.


"Russia may be congratulated on the appearance of a new author,"
said Fyodor. "Joking apart, though, brother, I have turned out a
little article--the firstfruits of my pen, so to say--and I've
brought it to show you. Read it, dear boy, and tell me your opinion
--but sincerely."


He took a manuscript out of his pocket and gave it to his brother.
The article was called "The Russian Soul"; it was written tediously,
in the colourless style in which people with no talent, but full
of secret vanity, usually write. The leading idea of it was that
the intellectual man has the right to disbelieve in the supernatural,
but it is his duty to conceal his lack of faith, that he may not
be a stumbling-block and shake the faith of others. Without faith
there is no idealism, and idealism is destined to save Europe and
guide humanity into the true path.


"But you don't say what Europe has to be saved from," said Laptev.


"That's intelligible of itself."


"Nothing is intelligible," said Laptev, and he walked about the
room in agitation. "It's not intelligible to me why you wrote it.
But that's your business."


"I want to publish it in pamphlet form."


"That's your affair."


They were silent for a minute. Fyodor sighed and said:


"It's an immense regret to me, dear brother, that we think differently.
Oh, Alyosha, Alyosha, my darling brother! You and I are true Russians,
true believers, men of broad nature; all of these German and Jewish
crochets are not for us. You and I are not wretched upstarts, you
know, but representatives of a distinguished merchant family."


"What do you mean by a distinguished family?" said Laptev, restraining
his irritation. "A distinguished family! The landowners beat our
grandfather and every low little government clerk punched him in
the face. Our grandfather thrashed our father, and our father
thrashed us. What has your distinguished family done for us? What
sort of nerves, what sort of blood, have we inherited? For nearly
three years you've been arguing like an ignorant deacon, and talking
all sorts of nonsense, and now you've written--this slavish drivel
here! While I, while I! Look at me. . . . No elasticity, no boldness,
no strength of will; I tremble over every step I take as though I
should be flogged for it. I am timid before nonentities, idiots,
brutes, who are immeasurably my inferiors mentally and morally; I
am afraid of porters, doorkeepers, policemen, gendarmes. I am afraid
of every one, because I was born of a mother who was terrified, and
because from a child I was beaten and frightened! . . . You and I
will do well to have no children. Oh, God, grant that this distinguished
merchant family may die with us!"


Yulia Sergeyevna came into the study and sat down at the table.


"Are you arguing about something here?" she asked. "Am I interrupting?"


"No, little sister," answered Fyodor. "Our discussion was of
principles. Here, you are abusing the family," he added, turning
to his brother. "That family has created a business worth a million,
though. That stands for something, anyway!"


"A great distinction--a business worth a million! A man with no
particular brains, without abilities, by chance becomes a trader,
and then when he has grown rich he goes on trading from day to day,
with no sort of system, with no aim, without having any particular
greed for money. He trades mechanically, and money comes to him of
itself, without his going to meet it. He sits all his life at his
work, likes it only because he can domineer over his clerks and get
the better of his customers. He's a churchwarden because he can
domineer over the choristers and keep them under his thumb; he's
the patron of a school because he likes to feel the teacher is his
subordinate and enjoys lording it over him. The merchant does not
love trading, he loves dominating, and your warehouse is not so
much a commercial establishment as a torture chamber! And for a
business like yours, you want clerks who have been deprived of
individual character and personal life--and you make them such
by forcing them in childhood to lick the dust for a crust of bread,
and you've trained them from childhood to believe that you are their
benefactors. No fear of your taking a university man into your
warehouse!"


"University men are not suitable for our business."


"That's not true," cried Laptev. "It's a lie!"


"Excuse me, it seems to me you spit into the well from which you
drink yourself," said Fyodor, and he got up. "Our business is hateful
to you, yet you make use of the income from it."


"Aha! We've spoken our minds," said Laptev, and he laughed, looking
angrily at his brother. "Yes, if I didn't belong to your distinguished
family--if I had an ounce of will and courage, I should long ago
have flung away that income, and have gone to work for my living.
But in your warehouse you've destroyed all character in me from a
child! I'm your product."


Fyodor looked at the clock and began hurriedly saying good-bye. He
kissed Yulia's hand and went out, but instead of going into the
hall, walked into the drawing-room, then into the bedroom.


"I've forgotten how the rooms go," he said in extreme confusion.
"It's a strange house. Isn't it a strange house!"


He seemed utterly overcome as he put on his coat, and there was a
look of pain on his face. Laptev felt no more anger; he was frightened,
and at the same time felt sorry for Fyodor, and the warm, true love
for his brother, which seemed to have died down in his heart during
those three years, awoke, and he felt an intense desire to express
that love.


"Come to dinner with us to-morrow, Fyodor," he said, and stroked
him on the shoulder. "Will you come?"


"Yes, yes; but give me some water."


Laptev ran himself to the dining-room to take the first thing he
could get from the sideboard. This was a tall beer-jug. He poured
water into it and brought it to his brother. Fyodor began drinking,
but bit a piece out of the jug; they heard a crunch, and then sobs.
The water ran over his fur coat and his jacket, and Laptev, who had
never seen men cry, stood in confusion and dismay, not knowing what
to do. He looked on helplessly while Yulia and the servant took off
Fyodor's coat and helped him back again into the room, and went
with him, feeling guilty.


Yulia made Fyodor lie down on the sofa and knelt beside him.


"It's nothing," she said, trying to comfort him. "It's your
nerves. . . ."


"I'm so miserable, my dear!" he said. "I am so unhappy, unhappy
. . . but all the time I've been hiding it, I've been hiding it!"


He put his arm round her neck and whispered in her ear:


"Every night I see my sister Nina. She comes and sits in the chair
near my bed. . . ."


When, an hour later, he put on his fur coat in the hall, he was
smiling again and ashamed to face the servant. Laptev went with him
to Pyatnitsky Street.


"Come and have dinner with us to-morrow," he said on the way, holding
him by the arm, "and at Easter we'll go abroad together. You
absolutely must have a change, or you'll be getting quite morbid."


When he got home Laptev found his wife in a state of great nervous
agitation. The scene with Fyodor had upset her, and she could not
recover her composure. She wasn't crying but kept tossing on the
bed, clutching with cold fingers at the quilt, at the pillows, at
her husband's hands. Her eyes looked big and frightened.


"Don't go away from me, don't go away," she said to her husband.
"Tell me, Alyosha, why have I left off saying my prayers? What has
become of my faith? Oh, why did you talk of religion before me?
You've shaken my faith, you and your friends. I never pray now."


He put compresses on her forehead, chafed her hands, gave her tea
to drink, while she huddled up to him in terror. . . .


Towards morning she was worn out and fell asleep, while Laptev sat
beside her and held her hand. So that he could get no sleep. The
whole day afterwards he felt shattered and dull, and wandered
listlessly about the rooms without a thought in his head.



XVI


The doctor said that Fyodor's mind was affected. Laptev did not
know what to do in his father's house, while the dark warehouse in
which neither his father nor Fyodor ever appeared now seemed to him
like a sepulchre. When his wife told him that he absolutely must
go every day to the warehouse and also to his father's, he either
said nothing, or began talking irritably of his childhood, saying
that it was beyond his power to forgive his father for his past,
that the warehouse and the house in Pyatnitsky Street were hateful
to him, and so on.


One Sunday morning Yulia went herself to Pyatnitsky Street. She
found old Fyodor Stepanovitch in the same big drawing-room in which
the service had been held on her first arrival. Wearing slippers,
and without a cravat, he was sitting motionless in his arm-chair,
blinking with his sightless eyes.


"It's I--your daughter-in-law," she said, going up to him. "I've
come to see how you are."


He began breathing heavily with excitement.


Touched by his affliction and his loneliness, she kissed his hand;
and he passed his hand over her face and head, and having satisfied
himself that it was she, made the sign of the cross over her.


"Thank you, thank you," he said. "You know I've lost my eyes and
can see nothing. . . . I can dimly see the window and the fire, but
people and things I cannot see at all. Yes, I'm going blind, and
Fyodor has fallen ill, and without the master's eye things are in
a bad way now. If there is any irregularity there's no one to look
into it; and folks soon get spoiled. And why is it Fyodor has fallen
ill? Did he catch cold? Here I have never ailed in my life and never
taken medicine. I never saw anything of doctors."


And, as he always did, the old man began boasting. Meanwhile the
servants hurriedly laid the table and brought in lunch and bottles
of wine.


Ten bottles were put on the table; one of them was in the shape of
the Eiffel Tower. There was a whole dish of hot pies smelling of
jam, rice, and fish.


"I beg my dear guest to have lunch," said the old man.


She took him by the arm, led him to the table, and poured him out
a glass of vodka.


"I will come to you again to-morrow," she said, "and I'll bring
your grandchildren, Sasha and Lida. They will be sorry for you, and
fondle you."


"There's no need. Don't bring them. They are illegitimate."


"Why are they illegitimate? Why, their father and mother were
married."


"Without my permission. I do not bless them, and I don't want to
know them. Let them be."


"You speak strangely, Fyodor Stepanovitch," said Yulia, with a sigh.


"It is written in the Gospel: children must fear and honour their
parents."


"Nothing of the sort. The Gospel tells us that we must forgive even
our enemies."


"One can't forgive in our business. If you were to forgive every
one, you would come to ruin in three years."


"But to forgive, to say a kind, friendly word to any one, even a
sinner, is something far above business, far above wealth."


Yulia longed to soften the old man, to awaken a feeling of compassion
in him, to move him to repentance; but he only listened condescendingly
to all she said, as a grown-up person listens to a child.


"Fyodor Stepanovitch," said Yulia resolutely, "you are an old man,
and God soon will call you to Himself. He won't ask you how you
managed your business, and whether you were successful in it, but
whether you were gracious to people; or whether you were harsh to
those who were weaker than you, such as your servants, your clerks."


"I was always the benefactor of those that served me; they ought
to remember me in their prayers forever," said the old man, with
conviction, but touched by Yulia's tone of sincerity, and anxious
to give her pleasure, he said: "Very well; bring my grandchildren
to-morrow. I will tell them to buy me some little presents for
them."


The old man was slovenly in his dress, and there was cigar ash on
his breast and on his knees; apparently no one cleaned his boots,
or brushed his clothes. The rice in the pies was half cooked, the
tablecloth smelt of soap, the servants tramped noisily about the
room. And the old man and the whole house had a neglected look, and
Yulia, who felt this, was ashamed of herself and of her husband.


"I will be sure to come and see you to-morrow," she said.


She walked through the rooms, and gave orders for the old man's
bedroom to be set to rights, and the lamp to be lighted under the
ikons in it. Fyodor, sitting in his own room, was looking at an
open book without reading it. Yulia talked to him and told the
servants to tidy his room, too; then she went downstairs to the
clerks. In the middle of the room where the clerks used to dine,
there was an unpainted wooden post to support the ceiling and to
prevent its coming down. The ceilings in the basement were low, the
walls covered with cheap paper, and there was a smell of charcoal
fumes and cooking. As it was a holiday, all the clerks were at home,
sitting on their bedsteads waiting for dinner. When Yulia went in
they jumped up, and answered her questions timidly, looking up at
her from under their brows like convicts.


"Good heavens! What a horrid room you have!" she said, throwing up
her hands. "Aren't you crowded here?"


"Crowded, but not aggrieved," said Makeitchev. "We are greatly
indebted to you, and will offer up our prayers for you to our
Heavenly Father."


"The congruity of life with the conceit of the personality," said
Potchatkin.


And noticing that Yulia did not understand Potchatkin, Makeitchev
hastened to explain:


"We are humble people and must live according to our position."


She inspected the boys' quarters, and then the kitchen, made
acquaintance with the housekeeper, and was thoroughly dissatisfied.


When she got home she said to her husband:


"We ought to move into your father's house and settle there for
good as soon as possible. And you will go every day to the warehouse."


Then they both sat side by side in the study without speaking. His
heart was heavy, and he did not want to move into Pyatnitsky Street
or to go into the warehouse; but he guessed what his wife was
thinking, and could not oppose her. He stroked her cheek and said:


"I feel as though our life is already over, and that a grey half-life
is beginning for us. When I knew that my brother Fyodor was hopelessly
ill, I shed tears; we spent our childhood and youth together, when
I loved him with my whole soul. And now this catastrophe has come,
and it seems, too, as though, losing him, I am finally cut away
from my past. And when you said just now that we must move into the
house in Pyatnitsky Street, to that prison, it began to seem to me
that there was no future for me either."


He got up and walked to the window.


"However that may be, one has to give up all thoughts of happiness,"
he said, looking out into the street. "There is none. I never have
had any, and I suppose it doesn't exist at all. I was happy once
in my life, though, when I sat at night under your parasol. Do you
remember how you left your parasol at Nina's?" he asked, turning
to his wife. "I was in love with you then, and I remember I spent
all night sitting under your parasol, and was perfectly blissful."


Near the book-case in the study stood a mahogany chest with bronze
fittings where Laptev kept various useless things, including the
parasol. He took it out and handed it to his wife.


"Here it is."


Yulia looked for a minute at the parasol, recognised it, and smiled
mournfully.


"I remember," she said. "When you proposed to me you held it in
your hand." And seeing that he was preparing to go out, she said:
"Please come back early if you can. I am dull without you."


And then she went into her own room, and gazed for a long time at
the parasol.



XVII


In spite of the complexity of the business and the immense turnover,
there were no bookkeepers in the warehouse, and it was impossible
to make anything out of the books kept by the cashier in the office.
Every day the warehouse was visited by agents, German and English,
with whom the clerks talked politics and religion. A man of noble
birth, ruined by drink, an ailing, pitiable creature, used to come
to translate the foreign correspondence in the office; the clerks
used to call him a midge, and put salt in his tea. And altogether
the whole concern struck Laptev as a very queer business.


He went to the warehouse every day and tried to establish a new
order of things; he forbade them to thrash the boys and to jeer at
the buyers, and was violently angry when the clerks gleefully
despatched to the provinces worthless shop-soiled goods as though
they were new and fashionable. Now he was the chief person in the
warehouse, but still, as before, he did not know how large his
fortune was, whether his business was doing well, how much the
senior clerks were paid, and so on. Potchatkin and Makeitchev looked
upon him as young and inexperienced, concealed a great deal from
him, and whispered mysteriously every evening with his blind old
father.


It somehow happened at the beginning of June that Laptev went into
the Bubnovsky restaurant with Potchatkin to talk business with him
over lunch. Potchatkin had been with the Laptevs a long while, and
had entered their service at eight years old. He seemed to belong
to them--they trusted him fully; and when on leaving the warehouse
he gathered up all the takings from the till and thrust them into
his pocket, it never aroused the slightest suspicion. He was the
head man in the business and in the house, and also in the church,
where he performed the duties of churchwarden in place of his old
master. He was nicknamed Malyuta Skuratov on account of his cruel
treatment of the boys and clerks under him.


When they went into the restaurant he nodded to a waiter and said:


"Bring us, my lad, half a bodkin and twenty-four unsavouries."


After a brief pause the waiter brought on a tray half a bottle of
vodka and some plates of various kinds of savouries.


"Look here, my good fellow," said Potchatkin. "Give us a plateful
of the source of all slander and evil-speaking, with mashed potatoes."


The waiter did not understand; he was puzzled, and would have said
something, but Potchatkin looked at him sternly and said:


"Except."


The waiter thought intently, then went to consult with his colleagues,
and in the end guessing what was meant, brought a plateful of tongue.
When they had drunk a couple of glasses and had had lunch, Laptev
asked:


"Tell me, Ivan Vassilitch, is it true that our business has been
dropping off for the last year?"


"Not a bit of it."


"Tell me frankly and honestly what income we have been making and
are making, and what our profits are. We can't go on in the dark.
We had a balancing of the accounts at the warehouse lately, but,
excuse me, I don't believe in it; you think fit to conceal something
from me and only tell the truth to my father. You have been used
to being diplomatic from your childhood, and now you can't get on
without it. And what's the use of it? So I beg you to be open. What
is our position?"


"It all depends upon the fluctuation of credit," Potchatkin answered
after a moment's pause.


"What do you understand by the fluctuation of credit?"


Potchatkin began explaining, but Laptev could make nothing of it,
and sent for Makeitchev. The latter promptly made his appearance,
had some lunch after saying grace, and in his sedate, mellow baritone
began saying first of all that the clerks were in duty bound to
pray night and day for their benefactors.


"By all means, only allow me not to consider myself your benefactor,"
said Laptev.


"Every man ought to remember what he is, and to be conscious of his
station. By the grace of God you are a father and benefactor to us,
and we are your slaves."


"I am sick of all that!" said Laptev, getting angry. "Please be a
benefactor to me now. Please explain the position of our business.
Give up looking upon me as a boy, or to-morrow I shall close the
business. My father is blind, my brother is in the asylum, my nieces
are only children. I hate the business; I should be glad to go away,
but there's no one to take my place, as you know. For goodness'
sake, drop your diplomacy!"


They went to the warehouse to go into the accounts; then they went
on with them at home in the evening, the old father himself assisting.
Initiating his son into his commercial secrets, the old man spoke
as though he were engaged, not in trade, but in sorcery. It appeared
that the profits of the business were increasing approximately ten
per cent. per annum, and that the Laptevs' fortune, reckoning only
money and paper securities, amounted to six million roubles.


When at one o'clock at night, after balancing the accounts, Laptev
went out into the open air, he was still under the spell of those
figures. It was a still, sultry, moonlight night. The white walls
of the houses beyond the river, the heavy barred gates, the stillness
and the black shadows, combined to give the impression of a fortress,
and nothing was wanting to complete the picture but a sentinel with
a gun. Laptev went into the garden and sat down on a seat near the
fence, which divided them from the neighbour's yard, where there
was a garden, too. The bird-cherry was in bloom. Laptev remembered
that the tree had been just as gnarled and just as big when he was
a child, and had not changed at all since then. Every corner of the
garden and of the yard recalled the far-away past. And in his
childhood, too, just as now, the whole yard bathed in moonlight
could be seen through the sparse trees, the shadows had been
mysterious and forbidding, a black dog had lain in the middle of
the yard, and the clerks' windows had stood wide open. And all these
were cheerless memories.


The other side of the fence, in the neighbour's yard, there was a
sound of light steps.


"My sweet, my precious . . ." said a man's voice so near the fence
that Laptev could hear the man's breathing.


Now they were kissing. Laptev was convinced that the millions and
the business which was so distasteful to him were ruining his life,
and would make him a complete slave. He imagined how, little by
little, he would grow accustomed to his position; would, little by
little, enter into the part of the head of a great firm; would begin
to grow dull and old, die in the end, as the average man usually
does die, in a decrepit, soured old age, making every one about him
miserable and depressed. But what hindered him from giving up those
millions and that business, and leaving that yard and garden which
had been hateful to him from his childhood?


The whispering and kisses the other side of the fence disturbed
him. He moved into the middle of the yard, and, unbuttoning his
shirt over his chest, looked at the moon, and it seemed to him that
he would order the gate to be unlocked, and would go out and never
come back again. His heart ached sweetly with the foretaste of
freedom; he laughed joyously, and pictured how exquisite, poetical,
and even holy, life might be. . . .


But he still stood and did not go away, and kept asking himself:
"What keeps me here?" And he felt angry with himself and with the
black dog, which still lay stretched on the stone yard, instead of
running off to the open country, to the woods, where it would have
been free and happy. It was clear that that dog and he were prevented
from leaving the yard by the same thing; the habit of bondage, of
servitude. . . .


At midday next morning he went to see his wife, and that he might
not be dull, asked Yartsev to go with him. Yulia Sergeyevna was
staying in a summer villa at Butovo, and he had not been to see her
for five days. When they reached the station the friends got into
a carriage, and all the way there Yartsev was singing and in raptures
over the exquisite weather. The villa was in a great park not far
from the station. At the beginning of an avenue, about twenty paces
from the gates, Yulia Sergeyevna was sitting under a broad, spreading
poplar, waiting for her guests. She had on a light, elegant dress
of a pale cream colour trimmed with lace, and in her hand she had
the old familiar parasol. Yartsev greeted her and went on to the
villa from which came the sound of Sasha's and Lida's voices, while
Laptev sat down beside her to talk of business matters.


"Why is it you haven't been for so long?" she said, keeping his
hand in hers. "I have been sitting here for days watching for you
to come. I miss you so when you are away!"


She stood up and passed her hand over his hair, and scanned his
face, his shoulders, his hat, with interest.


"You know I love you," she said, and flushed crimson. "You are
precious to me. Here you've come. I see you, and I'm so happy I
can't tell you. Well, let us talk. Tell me something."


She had told him she loved him, and he could only feel as though
he had been married to her for ten years, and that he was hungry
for his lunch. She had put her arm round his neck, tickling his
cheek with the silk of her dress; he cautiously removed her hand,
stood up, and without uttering a single word, walked to the villa.
The little girls ran to meet him.


"How they have grown!" he thought. "And what changes in these three
years. . . . But one may have to live another thirteen years, another
thirty years. . . . What is there in store for us in the future?
If we live, we shall see."


He embraced Sasha and Lida, who hung upon his neck, and said:


"Grandpapa sends his love. . . . Uncle Fyodor is dying. Uncle Kostya
has sent a letter from America and sends you his love in it. He's
bored at the exhibition and will soon be back. And Uncle Alyosha
is hungry."


Then he sat on the verandah and saw his wife walking slowly along
the avenue towards the house. She was deep in thought; there was a
mournful, charming expression in her face, and her eyes were bright
with tears. She was not now the slender, fragile, pale-faced girl
she used to be; she was a mature, beautiful, vigorous woman. And
Laptev saw the enthusiasm with which Yartsev looked at her when he
met her, and the way her new, lovely expression was reflected in
his face, which looked mournful and ecstatic too. One would have
thought that he was seeing her for the first time in his life. And
while they were at lunch on the verandah, Yartsev smiled with a
sort of joyous shyness, and kept gazing at Yulia and at her beautiful
neck. Laptev could not help watching them while he thought that he
had perhaps another thirteen, another thirty years of life before
him. . . . And what would he have to live through in that time?
What is in store for us in the future?


And he thought:


"Let us live, and we shall see."