THE WIFE


I

I RECEIVED the following letter:


“DEAR SIR, PAVEL ANDREITCH!


“Not far from you—that is to say, in the village of Pestrovo—very
distressing incidents are taking place, concerning which I feel it my duty
to write to you. All the peasants of that village sold their cottages and
all their belongings, and set off for the province of Tomsk, but did not
succeed in getting there, and have come back. Here, of course, they have
nothing now; everything belongs to other people. They have settled three
or four families in a hut, so that there are no less than fifteen persons
of both sexes in each hut, not counting the young children; and the long
and the short of it is, there is nothing to eat. There is famine and there
is a terrible pestilence of hunger, or spotted, typhus; literally every
one is stricken. The doctor’s assistant says one goes into a cottage and
what does one see? Every one is sick, every one delirious, some laughing,
others frantic; the huts are filthy; there is no one to fetch them water,
no one to give them a drink, and nothing to eat but frozen potatoes. What
can Sobol (our Zemstvo doctor) and his lady assistant do when more than
medicine the peasants need bread which they have not? The District Zemstvo
refuses to assist them, on the ground that their names have been taken off
the register of this district, and that they are now reckoned as
inhabitants of Tomsk; and, besides, the Zemstvo has no money.


“Laying these facts before you, and knowing your humanity, I beg you not
to refuse immediate help.


“Your well-wisher.”


Obviously the letter was written by the doctor with the animal name* or
his lady assistant. Zemstvo doctors and their assistants go on for years
growing more and more convinced every day that they can do nothing,
and yet continue to receive their salaries from people who are living upon
frozen potatoes, and consider they have a right to judge whether I am
humane or not.


*Sobol in Russian means “sable-marten.”—TRANSLATOR’S NOTE.


Worried by the anonymous letter and by the fact that peasants came every
morning to the servants’ kitchen and went down on their knees there, and
that twenty sacks of rye had been stolen at night out of the barn, the
wall having first been broken in, and by the general depression which was
fostered by conversations, newspapers, and horrible weather—worried
by all this, I worked listlessly and ineffectively. I was writing “A
History of Railways”; I had to read a great number of Russian and foreign
books, pamphlets, and articles in the magazines, to make calculations, to
refer to logarithms, to think and to write; then again to read, calculate,
and think; but as soon as I took up a book or began to think, my thoughts
were in a muddle, my eyes began bIlinking, I would get up from the table
with a sigh and begin walking about the big rooms of my deserted
country-house. When I was tired of walking about I would stand still at my
study window, and, looking across the wide courtyard, over the pond and
the bare young birch-trees and the great fields covered with recently
fallen, thawing snow, I saw on a low hill on the horizon a group of
mud-coloured huts from which a black muddy road ran down in an irregular
streak through the white field. That was Pestrovo, concerning which my
anonymous correspondent had written to me. If it had not been for the
crows who, foreseeing rain or snowy weather, floated cawing over the pond
and the fields, and the tapping in the carpenter’s shed, this bit of the
world about which such a fuss was being made would have seemed like the
Dead Sea; it was all so still, motionless, lifeless, and dreary!


My uneasiness hindered me from working and concentrating myself; I did not
know what it was, and chose to believe it was disappointment. I had
actually given up my post in the Department of Ways and Communications,
and had come here into the country expressly to live in peace and to
devote myself to writing on social questions. It had long been my
cherished dream. And now I had to say good-bye both to peace and to
literature, to give up everything and think only of the peasants. And that
was inevitable, because I was convinced that there was absolutely nobody
in the district except me to help the starving. The people surrounding me
were uneducated, unintellectual, callous, for the most part dishonest, or
if they were honest, they were unreasonable and unpractical like my wife,
for instance. It was impossible to rely on such people, it was impossible
to leave the peasants to their fate, so that the only thing left to do was
to submit to necessity and see to setting the peasants to rights myself.


I began by making up my mind to give five thousand roubles to the
assistance of the starving peasants. And that did not decrease, but only
aggravated my uneasiness. As I stood by the window or walked about the
rooms I was tormented by the question which had not occurred to me before:
how this money was to be spent. To have bread bought and to go from hut to
hut distributing it was more than one man could do, to say nothing of the
risk that in your haste you might give twice as much to one who was
well-fed or to one who was making money out of his fellows as to the
hungry. I had no faith in the local officials. All these district captains
and tax inspectors were young men, and I distrusted them as I do all young
people of today, who are materialistic and without ideals. The District
Zemstvo, the Peasant Courts, and all the local institutions, inspired in
me not the slightest desire to appeal to them for assistance. I knew that
all these institutions who were busily engaged in picking out plums from
the Zemstvo and the Government pie had their mouths always wide open for a
bite at any other pie that might turn up.


The idea occurred to me to invite the neighbouring landowners and suggest
to them to organize in my house something like a committee or a centre to
which all subscriptions could be forwarded, and from which assistance and
instructions could be distributed throughout the district; such an
organization, which would render possible frequent consultations and free
control on a big scale, would completely meet my views. But I imagined the
lunches, the dinners, the suppers and the noise, the waste of time, the
verbosity and the bad taste which that mixed provincial company would
inevitably bring into my house, and I made haste to reject my idea.


As for the members of my own household, the last thing I could look for
was help or support from them. Of my father’s household, of the household
of my childhood, once a big and noisy family, no one remained but the
governess Mademoiselle Marie, or, as she was now called, Marya
Gerasimovna, an absolutely insignificant person. She was a precise little
old lady of seventy, who wore a light grey dress and a cap with white
ribbons, and looked like a china doll. She always sat in the drawing-room
reading.


Whenever I passed by her, she would say, knowing the reason for my
brooding:


“What can you expect, Pasha? I told you how it would be before. You can
judge from our servants.”


My wife, Natalya Gavrilovna, lived on the lower storey, all the rooms of
which she occupied. She slept, had her meals, and received her visitors
downstairs in her own rooms, and took not the slightest interest in how I
dined, or slept, or whom I saw. Our relations with one another were simple
and not strained, but cold, empty, and dreary as relations are between
people who have been so long estranged, that even living under the same
roof gives no semblance of nearness. There was no trace now of the
passionate and tormenting love—at one time sweet, at another bitter
as wormwood—which I had once felt for Natalya Gavrilovna. There was
nothing left, either, of the outbursts of the past—the loud
altercations, upbraidings, complaints, and gusts of hatred which had
usually ended in my wife’s going abroad or to her own people, and in my
sending money in small but frequent instalments that I might sting her
pride oftener. (My proud and sensitive wife and her family live at my
expense, and much as she would have liked to do so, my wife could not
refuse my money: that afforded me satisfaction and was one comfort in my
sorrow.) Now when we chanced to meet in the corridor downstairs or in the
yard, I bowed, she smiled graciously. We spoke of the weather, said that
it seemed time to put in the double windows, and that some one with bells
on their harness had driven over the dam. And at such times I read in her
face: “I am faithful to you and am not disgracing your good name which you
think so much about; you are sensible and do not worry me; we are quits.”


I assured myself that my love had died long ago, that I was too much
absorbed in my work to think seriously of my relations with my wife. But,
alas! that was only what I imagined. When my wife talked aloud downstairs
I listened intently to her voice, though I could not distinguish one word.
When she played the piano downstairs I stood up and listened. When her
carriage or her saddlehorse was brought to the door, I went to the window
and waited to see her out of the house; then I watched her get into her
carriage or mount her horse and ride out of the yard. I felt that there
was something wrong with me, and was afraid the expression of my eyes or
my face might betray me. I looked after my wife and then watched for her
to come back that I might see again from the window her face, her
shoulders, her fur coat, her hat. I felt dreary, sad, infinitely
regretful, and felt inclined in her absence to walk through her rooms, and
longed that the problem that my wife and I had not been able to solve
because our characters were incompatible, should solve itself in the
natural way as soon as possible—that is, that this beautiful woman
of twenty-seven might make haste and grow old, and that my head might be
grey and bald.


One day at lunch my bailiff informed me that the Pestrovo peasants had
begun to pull the thatch off the roofs to feed their cattle. Marya
Gerasimovna looked at me in alarm and perplexity.


“What can I do?” I said to her. “One cannot fight single-handed, and I
have never experienced such loneliness as I do now. I would give a great
deal to find one man in the whole province on whom I could rely.”


“Invite Ivan Ivanitch,” said Marya Gerasimovna.


“To be sure!” I thought, delighted. “That is an idea! C’est raison,”
I hummed, going to my study to write to Ivan Ivanitch. “C’est raison,
c’est raison.”


II


Of all the mass of acquaintances who, in this house twenty-five to
thirty-five years ago, had eaten, drunk, masqueraded, fallen in love,
married, bored us with accounts of their splendid packs of hounds and
horses, the only one still living was Ivan Ivanitch Bragin. At one time he
had been very active, talkative, noisy, and given to falling in love, and
had been famous for his extreme views and for the peculiar charm of his
face, which fascinated men as well as women; now he was an old man, had
grown corpulent, and was living out his days with neither views nor charm.
He came the day after getting my letter, in the evening just as the
samovar was brought into the dining-room and little Marya Gerasimovna had
begun slicing the lemon.


“I am very glad to see you, my dear fellow,” I said gaily, meeting him.
“Why, you are stouter than ever....”


“It isn’t getting stout; it’s swelling,” he answered. “The bees must have
stung me.”


With the familiarity of a man laughing at his own fatness, he put his arms
round my waist and laid on my breast his big soft head, with the hair
combed down on the forehead like a Little Russian’s, and went off into a
thin, aged laugh.


“And you go on getting younger,” he said through his laugh. “I wonder what
dye you use for your hair and beard; you might let me have some of it.”
Sniffing and gasping, he embraced me and kissed me on the cheek. “You
might give me some of it,” he repeated. “Why, you are not forty, are you?”


“Alas, I am forty-six!” I said, laughing.


Ivan Ivanitch smelt of tallow candles and cooking, and that suited him.
His big, puffy, slow-moving body was swathed in a long frock-coat like a
coachman’s full coat, with a high waist, and with hooks and eyes instead
of buttons, and it would have been strange if he had smelt of
eau-de-Cologne, for instance. In his long, unshaven, bluish double chin,
which looked like a thistle, his goggle eyes, his shortness of breath, and
in the whole of his clumsy, slovenly figure, in his voice, his laugh, and
his words, it was difficult to recognize the graceful, interesting talker
who used in old days to make the husbands of the district jealous on
account of their wives.


“I am in great need of your assistance, my friend,” I said, when we were
sitting in the dining-room, drinking tea. “I want to organize relief for
the starving peasants, and I don’t know how to set about it. So perhaps
you will be so kind as to advise me.”


“Yes, yes, yes,” said Ivan Ivanitch, sighing. “To be sure, to be sure, to
be sure....”


“I would not have worried you, my dear fellow, but really there is no one
here but you I can appeal to. You know what people are like about here.”


“To be sure, to be sure, to be sure.... Yes.”


I thought that as we were going to have a serious, business consultation
in which any one might take part, regardless of their position or personal
relations, why should I not invite Natalya Gavrilovna.


“Tres faciunt collegium,” I said gaily. “What if we were to ask
Natalya Gavrilovna? What do you think? Fenya,” I said, turning to the
maid, “ask Natalya Gavrilovna to come upstairs to us, if possible at once.
Tell her it’s a very important matter.”


A little later Natalya Gavrilovna came in. I got up to meet her and said:


“Excuse us for troubling you, Natalie. We are discussing a very important
matter, and we had the happy thought that we might take advantage of your
good advice, which you will not refuse to give us. Please sit down.”


Ivan Ivanitch kissed her hand while she kissed his forehead; then, when we
all sat down to the table, he, looking at her tearfully and blissfully,
craned forward to her and kissed her hand again. She was dressed in black,
her hair was carefully arranged, and she smelt of fresh scent. She had
evidently dressed to go out or was expecting somebody. Coming into the
dining-room, she held out her hand to me with simple friendliness, and
smiled to me as graciously as she did to Ivan Ivanitch—that pleased
me; but as she talked she moved her fingers, often and abruptly leaned
back in her chair and talked rapidly, and this jerkiness in her words and
movements irritated me and reminded me of her native town—Odessa,
where the society, men and women alike, had wearied me by its bad taste.


“I want to do something for the famine-stricken peasants,” I began, and
after a brief pause I went on: “Money, of course, is a great thing, but to
confine oneself to subscribing money, and with that to be satisfied, would
be evading the worst of the trouble. Help must take the form of money, but
the most important thing is a proper and sound organization. Let us think
it over, my friends, and do something.”


Natalya Gavrilovna looked at me inquiringly and shrugged her shoulders as
though to say, “What do I know about it?”


“Yes, yes, famine...” muttered Ivan Ivanitch. “Certainly... yes.”


“It’s a serious position,” I said, “and assistance is needed as soon as
possible. I imagine the first point among the principles which we must
work out ought to be promptitude. We must act on the military principles
of judgment, promptitude, and energy.”


“Yes, promptitude...” repeated Ivan Ivanitch in a drowsy and listless
voice, as though he were dropping asleep. “Only one can’t do anything. The
crops have failed, and so what’s the use of all your judgment and
energy?... It’s the elements.... You can’t go against God and fate.”


“Yes, but that’s what man has a head for, to contend against the
elements.”


“Eh? Yes... that’s so, to be sure.... Yes.”


Ivan Ivanitch sneezed into his handkerchief, brightened up, and as though
he had just woken up, looked round at my wife and me.


“My crops have failed, too.” He laughed a thin little laugh and gave a sly
wink as though this were really funny. “No money, no corn, and a yard full
of labourers like Count Sheremetyev’s. I want to kick them out, but I
haven’t the heart to.”


Natalya Gavrilovna laughed, and began questioning him about his private
affairs. Her presence gave me a pleasure such as I had not felt for a long
time, and I was afraid to look at her for fear my eyes would betray my
secret feeling. Our relations were such that that feeling might seem
surprising and ridiculous.


She laughed and talked with Ivan Ivanitch without being in the least
disturbed that she was in my room and that I was not laughing.


“And so, my friends, what are we to do?” I asked after waiting for a
pause. “I suppose before we do anything else we had better immediately
open a subscription-list. We will write to our friends in the capitals and
in Odessa, Natalie, and ask them to subscribe. When we have got together a
little sum we will begin buying corn and fodder for the cattle; and you,
Ivan Ivanitch, will you be so kind as to undertake distributing the
relief? Entirely relying on your characteristic tact and efficiency, we
will only venture to express a desire that before you give any relief you
make acquaintance with the details of the case on the spot, and also,
which is very important, you should be careful that corn should be
distributed only to those who are in genuine need, and not to the drunken,
the idle, or the dishonest.”


“Yes, yes, yes...” muttered Ivan Ivanitch. “To be sure, to be sure.”


“Well, one won’t get much done with that slobbering wreck,” I thought, and
I felt irritated.


“I am sick of these famine-stricken peasants, bother them! It’s nothing
but grievances with them!” Ivan Ivanitch went on, sucking the rind of the
lemon. “The hungry have a grievance against those who have enough, and
those who have enough have a grievance against the hungry. Yes... hunger
stupefies and maddens a man and makes him savage; hunger is not a potato.
When a man is starving he uses bad language, and steals, and may do
worse.... One must realize that.”


Ivan Ivanitch choked over his tea, coughed, and shook all over with a
squeaky, smothered laughter.


“‘There was a battle at Pol... Poltava,’” he brought out, gesticulating
with both hands in protest against the laughter and coughing which
prevented him from speaking. “‘There was a battle at Poltava!’ When three
years after the Emancipation we had famine in two districts here, Fyodor
Fyodoritch came and invited me to go to him. ‘Come along, come along,’ he
persisted, and nothing else would satisfy him. ‘Very well, let us go,’ I
said. And, so we set off. It was in the evening; there was snow falling.
Towards night we were getting near his place, and suddenly from the wood
came ‘bang!’ and another time ‘bang!’ ‘Oh, damn it all!’... I jumped out
of the sledge, and I saw in the darkness a man running up to me, knee-deep
in the snow. I put my arm round his shoulder, like this, and knocked the
gun out of his hand. Then another one turned up; I fetched him a knock on
the back of his head so that he grunted and flopped with his nose in the
snow. I was a sturdy chap then, my fist was heavy; I disposed of two of
them, and when I turned round Fyodor was sitting astride of a third. We
did not let our three fine fellows go; we tied their hands behind their
backs so that they might not do us or themselves any harm, and took the
fools into the kitchen. We were angry with them and at the same time
ashamed to look at them; they were peasants we knew, and were good
fellows; we were sorry for them. They were quite stupid with terror. One
was crying and begging our pardon, the second looked like a wild beast and
kept swearing, the third knelt down and began to pray. I said to Fedya:
‘Don’t bear them a grudge; let them go, the rascals!’ He fed them, gave
them a bushel of flour each, and let them go: ‘Get along with you,’ he
said. So that’s what he did.... The Kingdom of Heaven be his and
everlasting peace! He understood and did not bear them a grudge; but there
were some who did, and how many people they ruined! Yes... Why, over the
affair at the Klotchkovs’ tavern eleven men were sent to the disciplinary
battalion. Yes.... And now, look, it’s the same thing. Anisyin, the
investigating magistrate, stayed the night with me last Thursday, and he
told me about some landowner.... Yes.... They took the wall of his barn to
pieces at night and carried off twenty sacks of rye. When the gentleman
heard that such a crime had been committed, he sent a telegram to the
Governor and another to the police captain, another to the investigating
magistrate!... Of course, every one is afraid of a man who is fond of
litigation. The authorities were in a flutter and there was a general
hubbub. Two villages were searched.”


“Excuse me, Ivan Ivanitch,” I said. “Twenty sacks of rye were stolen from
me, and it was I who telegraphed to the Governor. I telegraphed to
Petersburg, too. But it was by no means out of love for litigation, as you
are pleased to express it, and not because I bore them a grudge. I look at
every subject from the point of view of principle. From the point of view
of the law, theft is the same whether a man is hungry or not.”


“Yes, yes...” muttered Ivan Ivanitch in confusion. “Of course... To be
sure, yes.”


Natalya Gavrilovna blushed.


“There are people...” she said and stopped; she made an effort to seem
indifferent, but she could not keep it up, and looked into my eyes with
the hatred that I know so well. “There are people,” she said, “for whom
famine and human suffering exist simply that they may vent their hateful
and despicable temperaments upon them.”


I was confused and shrugged my shoulders.


“I meant to say generally,” she went on, “that there are people who are
quite indifferent and completely devoid of all feeling of sympathy, yet
who do not pass human suffering by, but insist on meddling for fear people
should be able to do without them. Nothing is sacred for their vanity.”


“There are people,” I said softly, “who have an angelic character, but who
express their glorious ideas in such a form that it is difficult to
distinguish the angel from an Odessa market-woman.”


I must confess it was not happily expressed.


My wife looked at me as though it cost her a great effort to hold her
tongue. Her sudden outburst, and then her inappropriate eloquence on the
subject of my desire to help the famine-stricken peasants, were, to say
the least, out of place; when I had invited her to come upstairs I had
expected quite a different attitude to me and my intentions. I cannot say
definitely what I had expected, but I had been agreeably agitated by the
expectation. Now I saw that to go on speaking about the famine would be
difficult and perhaps stupid.


“Yes...” Ivan Ivanitch muttered inappropriately. “Burov, the merchant,
must have four hundred thousand at least. I said to him: ‘Hand over one or
two thousand to the famine. You can’t take it with you when you die,
anyway.’ He was offended. But we all have to die, you know. Death is not a
potato.”


A silence followed again.


“So there’s nothing left for me but to reconcile myself to loneliness,” I
sighed. “One cannot fight single-handed. Well, I will try single-handed.
Let us hope that my campaign against the famine will be more successful
than my campaign against indifference.”


“I am expected downstairs,” said Natalya Gavrilovna.


She got up from the table and turned to Ivan Ivanitch.


“So you will look in upon me downstairs for a minute? I won’t say good-bye
to you.”


And she went away.


Ivan Ivanitch was now drinking his seventh glass of tea, choking, smacking
his lips, and sucking sometimes his moustache, sometimes the lemon. He was
muttering something drowsily and listlessly, and I did not listen but
waited for him to go. At last, with an expression that suggested that he
had only come to me to take a cup of tea, he got up and began to take
leave. As I saw him out I said:


“And so you have given me no advice.”


“Eh? I am a feeble, stupid old man,” he answered. “What use would my
advice be? You shouldn’t worry yourself.... I really don’t know why you
worry yourself. Don’t disturb yourself, my dear fellow! Upon my word,
there’s no need,” he whispered genuinely and affectionately, soothing me
as though I were a child. “Upon my word, there’s no need.”


“No need? Why, the peasants are pulling the thatch off their huts, and
they say there is typhus somewhere already.”


“Well, what of it? If there are good crops next year, they’ll thatch them
again, and if we die of typhus others will live after us. Anyway, we have
to die—if not now, later. Don’t worry yourself, my dear.”


“I can’t help worrying myself,” I said irritably.


We were standing in the dimly lighted vestibule. Ivan Ivanitch suddenly
took me by the elbow, and, preparing to say something evidently very
important, looked at me in silence for a couple of minutes.


“Pavel Andreitch!” he said softly, and suddenly in his puffy, set face and
dark eyes there was a gleam of the expression for which he had once been
famous and which was truly charming. “Pavel Andreitch, I speak to you as a
friend: try to be different! One is ill at ease with you, my dear fellow,
one really is!”


He looked intently into my face; the charming expression faded away, his
eyes grew dim again, and he sniffed and muttered feebly:


“Yes, yes.... Excuse an old man.... It’s all nonsense... yes.”


As he slowly descended the staircase, spreading out his hands to balance
himself and showing me his huge, bulky back and red neck, he gave me the
unpleasant impression of a sort of crab.


“You ought to go away, your Excellency,” he muttered. “To Petersburg or
abroad.... Why should you live here and waste your golden days? You are
young, wealthy, and healthy.... Yes.... Ah, if I were younger I would
whisk away like a hare, and snap my fingers at everything.”


III


My wife’s outburst reminded me of our married life together. In old days
after every such outburst we felt irresistibly drawn to each other; we
would meet and let off all the dynamite that had accumulated in our souls.
And now after Ivan Ivanitch had gone away I had a strong impulse to go to
my wife. I wanted to go downstairs and tell her that her behaviour at tea
had been an insult to me, that she was cruel, petty, and that her plebeian
mind had never risen to a comprehension of what I was saying and of
what I was doing. I walked about the rooms a long time thinking of
what I would say to her and trying to guess what she would say to me.


That evening, after Ivan Ivanitch went away, I felt in a peculiarly
irritating form the uneasiness which had worried me of late. I could not
sit down or sit still, but kept walking about in the rooms that were
lighted up and keeping near to the one in which Marya Gerasimovna was
sitting. I had a feeling very much like that which I had on the North Sea
during a storm when every one thought that our ship, which had no freight
nor ballast, would overturn. And that evening I understood that my
uneasiness was not disappointment, as I had supposed, but a different
feeling, though what exactly I could not say, and that irritated me more
than ever.


“I will go to her,” I decided. “I can think of a pretext. I shall say that
I want to see Ivan Ivanitch; that will be all.”


I went downstairs and walked without haste over the carpeted floor through
the vestibule and the hall. Ivan Ivanitch was sitting on the sofa in the
drawing-room; he was drinking tea again and muttering something. My wife
was standing opposite to him and holding on to the back of a chair. There
was a gentle, sweet, and docile expression on her face, such as one sees
on the faces of people listening to crazy saints or holy men when a
peculiar hidden significance is imagined in their vague words and
mutterings. There was something morbid, something of a nun’s exaltation,
in my wife’s expression and attitude; and her low-pitched, half-dark rooms
with their old-fashioned furniture, with her birds asleep in their cages,
and with a smell of geranium, reminded me of the rooms of some abbess or
pious old lady.


I went into the drawing-room. My wife showed neither surprise nor
confusion, and looked at me calmly and serenely, as though she had known I
should come.


“I beg your pardon,” I said softly. “I am so glad you have not gone yet,
Ivan Ivanitch. I forgot to ask you, do you know the Christian name of the
president of our Zemstvo?”


“Andrey Stanislavovitch. Yes....”


“Merci,” I said, took out my notebook, and wrote it down.


There followed a silence during which my wife and Ivan Ivanitch were
probably waiting for me to go; my wife did not believe that I wanted to
know the president’s name—I saw that from her eyes.


“Well, I must be going, my beauty,” muttered Ivan Ivanitch, after I had
walked once or twice across the drawing-room and sat down by the
fireplace.


“No,” said Natalya Gavrilovna quickly, touching his hand. “Stay another
quarter of an hour.... Please do!”


Evidently she did not wish to be left alone with me without a witness.


“Oh, well, I’ll wait a quarter of an hour, too,” I thought.


“Why, it’s snowing!” I said, getting up and looking out of window. “A good
fall of snow! Ivan Ivanitch”—I went on walking about the room—“I
do regret not being a sportsman. I can imagine what a pleasure it must be
coursing hares or hunting wolves in snow like this!”


My wife, standing still, watched my movements, looking out of the corner
of her eyes without turning her head. She looked as though she thought I
had a sharp knife or a revolver in my pocket.


“Ivan Ivanitch, do take me out hunting some day,” I went on softly. “I
shall be very, very grateful to you.”


At that moment a visitor came into the room. He was a tall, thick-set
gentleman whom I did not know, with a bald head, a big fair beard, and
little eyes. From his baggy, crumpled clothes and his manners I took him
to be a parish clerk or a teacher, but my wife introduced him to me as Dr.
Sobol.


“Very, very glad to make your acquaintance,” said the doctor in a loud
tenor voice, shaking hands with me warmly, with a naive smile. “Very
glad!”


He sat down at the table, took a glass of tea, and said in a loud voice:


“Do you happen to have a drop of rum or brandy? Have pity on me, Olya, and
look in the cupboard; I am frozen,” he said, addressing the maid.


I sat down by the fire again, looked on, listened, and from time to time
put in a word in the general conversation. My wife smiled graciously to
the visitors and kept a sharp lookout on me, as though I were a wild
beast. She was oppressed by my presence, and this aroused in me jealousy,
annoyance, and an obstinate desire to wound her. “Wife, these snug rooms,
the place by the fire,” I thought, “are mine, have been mine for years,
but some crazy Ivan Ivanitch or Sobol has for some reason more right to
them than I. Now I see my wife, not out of window, but close at hand, in
ordinary home surroundings that I feel the want of now I am growing older,
and, in spite of her hatred for me, I miss her as years ago in my
childhood I used to miss my mother and my nurse. And I feel that now, on
the verge of old age, my love for her is purer and loftier than it was in
the past; and that is why I want to go up to her, to stamp hard on her toe
with my heel, to hurt her and smile as I do it.”


“Monsieur Marten,” I said, addressing the doctor, “how many hospitals have
we in the district?”


“Sobol,” my wife corrected.


“Two,” answered Sobol.


“And how many deaths are there every year in each hospital?”


“Pavel Andreitch, I want to speak to you,” said my wife.


She apologized to the visitors and went to the next room. I got up and
followed her.


“You will go upstairs to your own rooms this minute,” she said.


“You are ill-bred,” I said to her.


“You will go upstairs to your own rooms this very minute,” she repeated
sharply, and she looked into my face with hatred.


She was standing so near that if I had stooped a little my beard would
have touched her face.


“What is the matter?” I asked. “What harm have I done all at once?”


Her chin quivered, she hastily wiped her eyes, and, with a cursory glance
at the looking-glass, whispered:


“The old story is beginning all over again. Of course you won’t go away.
Well, do as you like. I’ll go away myself, and you stay.”


We returned to the drawing-room, she with a resolute face, while I
shrugged my shoulders and tried to smile. There were some more visitors—an
elderly lady and a young man in spectacles. Without greeting the new
arrivals or taking leave of the others, I went off to my own rooms.


After what had happened at tea and then again downstairs, it became clear
to me that our “family happiness,” which we had begun to forget about in
the course of the last two years, was through some absurd and trivial
reason beginning all over again, and that neither I nor my wife could now
stop ourselves; and that next day or the day after, the outburst of hatred
would, as I knew by experience of past years, be followed by something
revolting which would upset the whole order of our lives. “So it seems
that during these two years we have grown no wiser, colder, or calmer,” I
thought as I began walking about the rooms. “So there will again be tears,
outcries, curses, packing up, going abroad, then the continual sickly fear
that she will disgrace me with some coxcomb out there, Italian or Russian,
refusing a passport, letters, utter loneliness, missing her, and in five
years old age, grey hairs.” I walked about, imagining what was really
impossible—her, grown handsomer, stouter, embracing a man I did not
know. By now convinced that that would certainly happen, “‘Why,” I asked
myself, “Why, in one of our long past quarrels, had not I given her a
divorce, or why had she not at that time left me altogether? I should not
have had this yearning for her now, this hatred, this anxiety; and I
should have lived out my life quietly, working and not worrying about
anything.”


A carriage with two lamps drove into the yard, then a big sledge with
three horses. My wife was evidently having a party.


Till midnight everything was quiet downstairs and I heard nothing, but at
midnight there was a sound of moving chairs and a clatter of crockery. So
there was supper. Then the chairs moved again, and through the floor I
heard a noise; they seemed to be shouting hurrah. Marya Gerasimovna was
already asleep and I was quite alone in the whole upper storey; the
portraits of my forefathers, cruel, insignificant people, looked at me
from the walls of the drawing-room, and the reflection of my lamp in the
window winked unpleasantly. And with a feeling of jealousy and envy for
what was going on downstairs, I listened and thought: “I am master here;
if I like, I can in a moment turn out all that fine crew.” But I knew that
all that was nonsense, that I could not turn out any one, and the word
“master” had no meaning. One may think oneself master, married, rich, a
kammer-junker, as much as one likes, and at the same time not know what it
means.


After supper some one downstairs began singing in a tenor voice.


“Why, nothing special has happened,” I tried to persuade myself. “Why am I
so upset? I won’t go downstairs tomorrow, that’s all; and that will be the
end of our quarrel.”


At a quarter past one I went to bed.


“Have the visitors downstairs gone?” I asked Alexey as he was undressing
me.


“Yes, sir, they’ve gone.”


“And why were they shouting hurrah?”


“Alexey Dmitritch Mahonov subscribed for the famine fund a thousand
bushels of flour and a thousand roubles. And the old lady—I don’t
know her name—promised to set up a soup kitchen on her estate to
feed a hundred and fifty people. Thank God... Natalya Gavrilovna has been
pleased to arrange that all the gentry should assemble every Friday.”


“To assemble here, downstairs?”


“Yes, sir. Before supper they read a list: since August up to today
Natalya Gavrilovna has collected eight thousand roubles, besides corn.
Thank God.... What I think is that if our mistress does take trouble for
the salvation of her soul, she will soon collect a lot. There are plenty
of rich people here.”


Dismissing Alexey, I put out the light and drew the bedclothes over my
head.


“After all, why am I so troubled?” I thought. “What force draws me to the
starving peasants like a butterfly to a flame? I don’t know them, I don’t
understand them; I have never seen them and I don’t like them. Why this
uneasiness?”


I suddenly crossed myself under the quilt.


“But what a woman she is!” I said to myself, thinking of my wife. “There’s
a regular committee held in the house without my knowing. Why this
secrecy? Why this conspiracy? What have I done to them? Ivan Ivanitch is
right—I must go away.”


Next morning I woke up firmly resolved to go away. The events of the
previous day—the conversation at tea, my wife, Sobol, the supper, my
apprehensions—worried me, and I felt glad to think of getting away
from the surroundings which reminded me of all that. While I was drinking
my coffee the bailiff gave me a long report on various matters. The most
agreeable item he saved for the last.


“The thieves who stole our rye have been found,” he announced with a
smile. “The magistrate arrested three peasants at Pestrovo yesterday.”


“Go away!” I shouted at him; and a propos of nothing, I picked up the
cake-basket and flung it on the floor.


IV


After lunch I rubbed my hands, and thought I must go to my wife and tell
her that I was going away. Why? Who cared? Nobody cares, I answered, but
why shouldn’t I tell her, especially as it would give her nothing but
pleasure? Besides, to go away after our yesterday’s quarrel without saying
a word would not be quite tactful: she might think that I was frightened
of her, and perhaps the thought that she has driven me out of my house may
weigh upon her. It would be just as well, too, to tell her that I
subscribe five thousand, and to give her some advice about the
organization, and to warn her that her inexperience in such a complicated
and responsible matter might lead to most lamentable results. In short, I
wanted to see my wife, and while I thought of various pretexts for going
to her, I had a firm conviction in my heart that I should do so.


It was still light when I went in to her, and the lamps had not yet been
lighted. She was sitting in her study, which led from the drawing-room to
her bedroom, and, bending low over the table, was writing something
quickly. Seeing me, she started, got up from the table, and remained
standing in an attitude such as to screen her papers from me.


“I beg your pardon, I have only come for a minute,” I said, and, I don’t
know why, I was overcome with embarrassment. “I have learnt by chance that
you are organizing relief for the famine, Natalie.”


“Yes, I am. But that’s my business,” she answered.


“Yes, it is your business,” I said softly. “I am glad of it, for it just
fits in with my intentions. I beg your permission to take part in it.”


“Forgive me, I cannot let you do it,” she said in response, and looked
away.


“Why not, Natalie?” I said quietly. “Why not? I, too, am well fed and I,
too, want to help the hungry.”


“I don’t know what it has to do with you,” she said with a contemptuous
smile, shrugging her shoulders. “Nobody asks you.”


“Nobody asks you, either, and yet you have got up a regular committee in
my house,” I said.


“I am asked, but you can have my word for it no one will ever ask you. Go
and help where you are not known.”


“For God’s sake, don’t talk to me in that tone.” I tried to be mild, and
besought myself most earnestly not to lose my temper. For the first few
minutes I felt glad to be with my wife. I felt an atmosphere of youth, of
home, of feminine softness, of the most refined elegance—exactly
what was lacking on my floor and in my life altogether. My wife was
wearing a pink flannel dressing-gown; it made her look much younger, and
gave a softness to her rapid and sometimes abrupt movements. Her beautiful
dark hair, the mere sight of which at one time stirred me to passion, had
from sitting so long with her head bent come loose from the comb and was
untidy, but, to my eyes, that only made it look more rich and luxuriant.
All this, though is banal to the point of vulgarity. Before me stood an
ordinary woman, perhaps neither beautiful nor elegant, but this was my
wife with whom I had once lived, and with whom I should have been living
to this day if it had not been for her unfortunate character; she was the
one human being on the terrestrial globe whom I loved. At this moment,
just before going away, when I knew that I should no longer see her even
through the window, she seemed to me fascinating even as she was, cold and
forbidding, answering me with a proud and contemptuous mockery. I was
proud of her, and confessed to myself that to go away from her was
terrible and impossible.


“Pavel Andreitch,” she said after a brief silence, “for two years we have
not interfered with each other but have lived quietly. Why do you suddenly
feel it necessary to go back to the past? Yesterday you came to insult and
humiliate me,” she went on, raising her voice, and her face flushed and
her eyes flamed with hatred; “but restrain yourself; do not do it, Pavel
Andreitch! Tomorrow I will send in a petition and they will give me a
passport, and I will go away; I will go! I will go! I’ll go into a
convent, into a widows’ home, into an almshouse....”


“Into a lunatic asylum!” I cried, not able to restrain myself.


“Well, even into a lunatic asylum! That would be better, that would be
better,” she cried, with flashing eyes. “When I was in Pestrovo today I
envied the sick and starving peasant women because they are not living
with a man like you. They are free and honest, while, thanks to you, I am
a parasite, I am perishing in idleness, I eat your bread, I spend your
money, and I repay you with my liberty and a fidelity which is of no use
to any one. Because you won’t give me a passport, I must respect your good
name, though it doesn’t exist.”


I had to keep silent. Clenching my teeth, I walked quickly into the
drawing-room, but turned back at once and said:


“I beg you earnestly that there should be no more assemblies, plots, and
meetings of conspirators in my house! I only admit to my house those with
whom I am acquainted, and let all your crew find another place to do it if
they want to take up philanthropy. I can’t allow people at midnight in my
house to be shouting hurrah at successfully exploiting an hysterical woman
like you!”


My wife, pale and wringing her hands, took a rapid stride across the room,
uttering a prolonged moan as though she had toothache. With a wave of my
hand, I went into the drawing-room. I was choking with rage, and at the
same time I was trembling with terror that I might not restrain myself,
and that I might say or do something which I might regret all my life. And
I clenched my hands tight, hoping to hold myself in.


After drinking some water and recovering my calm a little, I went back to
my wife. She was standing in the same attitude as before, as though
barring my approach to the table with the papers. Tears were slowly
trickling down her pale, cold face. I paused then and said to her bitterly
but without anger:


“How you misunderstand me! How unjust you are to me! I swear upon my
honour I came to you with the best of motives, with nothing but the desire
to do good!”


“Pavel Andreitch!” she said, clasping her hands on her bosom, and her face
took on the agonized, imploring expression with which frightened, weeping
children beg not to be punished, “I know perfectly well that you will
refuse me, but still I beg you. Force yourself to do one kind action in
your life. I entreat you, go away from here! That’s the only thing you can
do for the starving peasants. Go away, and I will forgive you everything,
everything!”


“There is no need for you to insult me, Natalie,” I sighed, feeling a
sudden rush of humility. “I had already made up my mind to go away, but I
won’t go until I have done something for the peasants. It’s my duty!”


“Ach!” she said softly with an impatient frown. “You can make an excellent
bridge or railway, but you can do nothing for the starving peasants. Do
understand!”


“Indeed? Yesterday you reproached me with indifference and with being
devoid of the feeling of compassion. How well you know me!” I laughed.
“You believe in God—well, God is my witness that I am worried day
and night....”


“I see that you are worried, but the famine and compassion have nothing to
do with it. You are worried because the starving peasants can get on
without you, and because the Zemstvo, and in fact every one who is helping
them, does not need your guidance.”


I was silent, trying to suppress my irritation. Then I said:


“I came to speak to you on business. Sit down. Please sit down.”


She did not sit down.


“I beg you to sit down,” I repeated, and I motioned her to a chair.


She sat down. I sat down, too, thought a little, and said:


“I beg you to consider earnestly what I am saying. Listen.... Moved by
love for your fellow-creatures, you have undertaken the organization of
famine relief. I have nothing against that, of course; I am completely in
sympathy with you, and am prepared to co-operate with you in every way,
whatever our relations may be. But, with all my respect for your mind and
your heart... and your heart,” I repeated, “I cannot allow such a
difficult, complex, and responsible matter as the organization of relief
to be left in your hands entirely. You are a woman, you are inexperienced,
you know nothing of life, you are too confiding and expansive. You have
surrounded yourself with assistants whom you know nothing about. I am not
exaggerating if I say that under these conditions your work will
inevitably lead to two deplorable consequences. To begin with, our
district will be left unrelieved; and, secondly, you will have to pay for
your mistakes and those of your assistants, not only with your purse, but
with your reputation. The money deficit and other losses I could, no
doubt, make good, but who could restore you your good name? When through
lack of proper supervision and oversight there is a rumour that you, and
consequently I, have made two hundred thousand over the famine fund, will
your assistants come to your aid?”


She said nothing.


“Not from vanity, as you say,” I went on, “but simply that the starving
peasants may not be left unrelieved and your reputation may not be
injured, I feel it my moral duty to take part in your work.”


“Speak more briefly,” said my wife.


“You will be so kind,” I went on, “as to show me what has been subscribed
so far and what you have spent. Then inform me daily of every fresh
subscription in money or kind, and of every fresh outlay. You will also
give me, Natalie, the list of your helpers. Perhaps they are quite decent
people; I don’t doubt it; but, still, it is absolutely necessary to make
inquiries.”


She was silent. I got up, and walked up and down the room.


“Let us set to work, then,” I said, and I sat down to her table.


“Are you in earnest?” she asked, looking at me in alarm and bewilderment.


“Natalie, do be reasonable!” I said appealingly, seeing from her face that
she meant to protest. “I beg you, trust my experience and my sense of
honour.”


“I don’t understand what you want.”


“Show me how much you have collected and how much you have spent.”


“I have no secrets. Any one may see. Look.”


On the table lay five or six school exercise books, several sheets of
notepaper covered with writing, a map of the district, and a number of
pieces of paper of different sizes. It was getting dusk. I lighted a
candle.


“Excuse me, I don’t see anything yet,” I said, turning over the leaves of
the exercise books. “Where is the account of the receipt of money
subscriptions?”


“That can be seen from the subscription lists.”


“Yes, but you must have an account,” I said, smiling at her naivete.
“Where are the letters accompanying the subscriptions in money or in kind?
Pardon, a little practical advice, Natalie: it’s absolutely
necessary to keep those letters. You ought to number each letter and make
a special note of it in a special record. You ought to do the same with
your own letters. But I will do all that myself.”


“Do so, do so...” she said.


I was very much pleased with myself. Attracted by this living interesting
work, by the little table, the naive exercise books and the charm of doing
this work in my wife’s society, I was afraid that my wife would suddenly
hinder me and upset everything by some sudden whim, and so I was in haste
and made an effort to attach no consequence to the fact that her lips were
quivering, and that she was looking about her with a helpless and
frightened air like a wild creature in a trap.


“I tell you what, Natalie,” I said without looking at her; “let me take
all these papers and exercise books upstairs to my study. There I will
look through them and tell you what I think about it tomorrow. Have you
any more papers?” I asked, arranging the exercise books and sheets of
papers in piles.


“Take them, take them all!” said my wife, helping me to arrange them, and
big tears ran down her cheeks. “Take it all! That’s all that was left me
in life.... Take the last.”


“Ach! Natalie, Natalie!” I sighed reproachfully.


She opened the drawer in the table and began flinging the papers out of it
on the table at random, poking me in the chest with her elbow and brushing
my face with her hair; as she did so, copper coins kept dropping upon my
knees and on the floor.


“Take everything!” she said in a husky voice.


When she had thrown out the papers she walked away from me, and putting
both hands to her head, she flung herself on the couch. I picked up the
money, put it back in the drawer, and locked it up that the servants might
not be led into dishonesty; then I gathered up all the papers and went off
with them. As I passed my wife I stopped and, looking at her back and
shaking shoulders, I said:


“What a baby you are, Natalie! Fie, fie! Listen, Natalie: when you realize
how serious and responsible a business it is you will be the first to
thank me. I assure you you will.”


In my own room I set to work without haste. The exercise books were not
bound, the pages were not numbered. The entries were put in all sorts of
handwritings; evidently any one who liked had a hand in managing the
books. In the record of the subscriptions in kind there was no note of
their money value. But, excuse me, I thought, the rye which is now worth
one rouble fifteen kopecks may be worth two roubles fifteen kopecks in two
months’ time! Was that the way to do things? Then, “Given to A. M. Sobol
32 roubles.” When was it given? For what purpose was it given? Where was
the receipt? There was nothing to show, and no making anything of it. In
case of legal proceedings, these papers would only obscure the case.


“How naive she is!” I thought with surprise. “What a child!”


I felt both vexed and amused.


V


My wife had already collected eight thousand; with my five it would be
thirteen thousand. For a start that was very good. The business which had
so worried and interested me was at last in my hands; I was doing what the
others would not and could not do; I was doing my duty, organizing the
relief fund in a practical and business-like way.


Everything seemed to be going in accordance with my desires and
intentions; but why did my feeling of uneasiness persist? I spent four
hours over my wife’s papers, making out their meaning and correcting her
mistakes, but instead of feeling soothed, I felt as though some one were
standing behind me and rubbing my back with a rough hand. What was it I
wanted? The organization of the relief fund had come into trustworthy
hands, the hungry would be fed—what more was wanted?


The four hours of this light work for some reason exhausted me, so that I
could not sit bending over the table nor write. From below I heard from
time to time a smothered moan; it was my wife sobbing. Alexey, invariably
meek, sleepy, and sanctimonious, kept coming up to the table to see to the
candles, and looked at me somewhat strangely.


“Yes, I must go away,” I decided at last, feeling utterly exhausted. “As
far as possible from these agreeable impressions! I will set off
tomorrow.”


I gathered together the papers and exercise books, and went down to my
wife. As, feeling quite worn out and shattered, I held the papers and the
exercise books to my breast with both hands, and passing through my
bedroom saw my trunks, the sound of weeping reached me through the floor.


“Are you a kammer-junker?” a voice whispered in my ear. “That’s a very
pleasant thing. But yet you are a reptile.”


“It’s all nonsense, nonsense, nonsense,” I muttered as I went downstairs.
“Nonsense... and it’s nonsense, too, that I am actuated by vanity or a
love of display.... What rubbish! Am I going to get a decoration for
working for the peasants or be made the director of a department?
Nonsense, nonsense! And who is there to show off to here in the country?”


I was tired, frightfully tired, and something kept whispering in my ear:
“Very pleasant. But, still, you are a reptile.” For some reason I
remembered a line out of an old poem I knew as a child: “How pleasant it
is to be good!”


My wife was lying on the couch in the same attitude, on her face and with
her hands clutching her head. She was crying. A maid was standing beside
her with a perplexed and frightened face. I sent the maid away, laid the
papers on the table, thought a moment and said:


“Here are all your papers, Natalie. It’s all in order, it’s all capital,
and I am very much pleased. I am going away tomorrow.”


She went on crying. I went into the drawing-room and sat there in the
dark. My wife’s sobs, her sighs, accused me of something, and to justify
myself I remembered the whole of our quarrel, starting from my unhappy
idea of inviting my wife to our consultation and ending with the exercise
books and these tears. It was an ordinary attack of our conjugal hatred,
senseless and unseemly, such as had been frequent during our married life,
but what had the starving peasants to do with it? How could it have
happened that they had become a bone of contention between us? It was just
as though pursuing one another we had accidentally run up to the altar and
had carried on a quarrel there.


“Natalie,” I said softly from the drawing-room, “hush, hush!”


To cut short her weeping and make an end of this agonizing state of
affairs, I ought to have gone up to my wife and comforted her, caressed
her, or apologized; but how could I do it so that she would believe me?
How could I persuade the wild duck, living in captivity and hating me,
that it was dear to me, and that I felt for its sufferings? I had never
known my wife, so I had never known how to talk to her or what to talk
about. Her appearance I knew very well and appreciated it as it deserved,
but her spiritual, moral world, her mind, her outlook on life, her
frequent changes of mood, her eyes full of hatred, her disdain, the scope
and variety of her reading which sometimes struck me, or, for instance,
the nun-like expression I had seen on her face the day before—all
that was unknown and incomprehensible to me. When in my collisions with
her I tried to define what sort of a person she was, my psychology went no
farther than deciding that she was giddy, impractical, ill-tempered,
guided by feminine logic; and it seemed to me that that was quite
sufficient. But now that she was crying I had a passionate desire to know
more.


The weeping ceased. I went up to my wife. She sat up on the couch, and,
with her head propped in both hands, looked fixedly and dreamily at the
fire.


“I am going away tomorrow morning,” I said.


She said nothing. I walked across the room, sighed, and said:


“Natalie, when you begged me to go away, you said: ‘I will forgive you
everything, everything’.... So you think I have wronged you. I beg you
calmly and in brief terms to formulate the wrong I’ve done you.”


“I am worn out. Afterwards, some time...” said my wife.


“How am I to blame?” I went on. “What have I done? Tell me: you are young
and beautiful, you want to live, and I am nearly twice your age and hated
by you, but is that my fault? I didn’t marry you by force. But if you want
to live in freedom, go; I’ll give you your liberty. You can go and love
whom you please.... I will give you a divorce.”


“That’s not what I want,” she said. “You know I used to love you and
always thought of myself as older than you. That’s all nonsense.... You
are not to blame for being older or for my being younger, or that I might
be able to love some one else if I were free; but because you are a
difficult person, an egoist, and hate every one.”


“Perhaps so. I don’t know,” I said.


“Please go away. You want to go on at me till the morning, but I warn you
I am quite worn out and cannot answer you. You promised me to go to town.
I am very grateful; I ask nothing more.”


My wife wanted me to go away, but it was not easy for me to do that. I was
dispirited and I dreaded the big, cheerless, chill rooms that I was so
weary of. Sometimes when I had an ache or a pain as a child, I used to
huddle up to my mother or my nurse, and when I hid my face in the warm
folds of their dress, it seemed to me as though I were hiding from the
pain. And in the same way it seemed to me now that I could only hide from
my uneasiness in this little room beside my wife. I sat down and screened
away the light from my eyes with my hand.... There was a stillness.


“How are you to blame?” my wife said after a long silence, looking at me
with red eyes that gleamed with tears. “You are very well educated and
very well bred, very honest, just, and high-principled, but in you the
effect of all that is that wherever you go you bring suffocation,
oppression, something insulting and humiliating to the utmost degree. You
have a straightforward way of looking at things, and so you hate the whole
world. You hate those who have faith, because faith is an expression of
ignorance and lack of culture, and at the same time you hate those who
have no faith for having no faith and no ideals; you hate old people for
being conservative and behind the times, and young people for
free-thinking. The interests of the peasantry and of Russia are dear to
you, and so you hate the peasants because you suspect every one of them of
being a thief and a robber. You hate every one. You are just, and always
take your stand on your legal rights, and so you are always at law with
the peasants and your neighbours. You have had twenty bushels of rye
stolen, and your love of order has made you complain of the peasants to
the Governor and all the local authorities, and to send a complaint of the
local authorities to Petersburg. Legal justice!” said my wife, and she
laughed. “On the ground of your legal rights and in the interests of
morality, you refuse to give me a passport. Law and morality is such that
a self-respecting healthy young woman has to spend her life in idleness,
in depression, and in continual apprehension, and to receive in return
board and lodging from a man she does not love. You have a thorough
knowledge of the law, you are very honest and just, you respect marriage
and family life, and the effect of all that is that all your life you have
not done one kind action, that every one hates you, that you are on bad
terms with every one, and the seven years that you have been married
you’ve only lived seven months with your wife. You’ve had no wife and I’ve
had no husband. To live with a man like you is impossible; there is no way
of doing it. In the early years I was frightened with you, and now I am
ashamed.... That’s how my best years have been wasted. When I fought with
you I ruined my temper, grew shrewish, coarse, timid, mistrustful.... Oh,
but what’s the use of talking! As though you wanted to understand! Go
upstairs, and God be with you!”


My wife lay down on the couch and sank into thought.


“And how splendid, how enviable life might have been!” she said softly,
looking reflectively into the fire. “What a life it might have been!
There’s no bringing it back now.”


Any one who has lived in the country in winter and knows those long
dreary, still evenings when even the dogs are too bored to bark and even
the clocks seem weary of ticking, and any one who on such evenings has
been troubled by awakening conscience and has moved restlessly about,
trying now to smother his conscience, now to interpret it, will understand
the distraction and the pleasure my wife’s voice gave me as it sounded in
the snug little room, telling me I was a bad man. I did not understand
what was wanted of me by my conscience, and my wife, translating it in her
feminine way, made clear to me in the meaning of my agitation. As often
before in the moments of intense uneasiness, I guessed that the whole
secret lay, not in the starving peasants, but in my not being the sort of
a man I ought to be.


My wife got up with an effort and came up to me.


“Pavel Andreitch,” she said, smiling mournfully, “forgive me, I don’t
believe you: you are not going away, but I will ask you one more favour.
Call this”—she pointed to her papers—“self-deception, feminine
logic, a mistake, as you like; but do not hinder me. It’s all that is left
me in life.” She turned away and paused. “Before this I had nothing. I
have wasted my youth in fighting with you. Now I have caught at this and
am living; I am happy.... It seems to me that I have found in this a means
of justifying my existence.”


“Natalie, you are a good woman, a woman of ideas,” I said, looking at my
wife enthusiastically, “and everything you say and do is intelligent and
fine.”


I walked about the room to conceal my emotion.


“Natalie,” I went on a minute later, “before I go away, I beg of you as a
special favour, help me to do something for the starving peasants!”


“What can I do?” said my wife, shrugging her shoulders. “Here’s the
subscription list.”


She rummaged among the papers and found the subscription list.


“Subscribe some money,” she said, and from her tone I could see that she
did not attach great importance to her subscription list; “that is the
only way in which you can take part in the work.”


I took the list and wrote: “Anonymous, 5,000.”


In this “anonymous” there was something wrong, false, conceited, but I
only realized that when I noticed that my wife flushed very red and
hurriedly thrust the list into the heap of papers. We both felt ashamed; I
felt that I must at all costs efface this clumsiness at once, or else I
should feel ashamed afterwards, in the train and at Petersburg. But how
efface it? What was I to say?


“I fully approve of what you are doing, Natalie,” I said genuinely, “and I
wish you every success. But allow me at parting to give you one piece of
advice, Natalie; be on your guard with Sobol, and with your assistants
generally, and don’t trust them blindly. I don’t say they are not honest,
but they are not gentlefolks; they are people with no ideas, no ideals, no
faith, with no aim in life, no definite principles, and the whole object
of their life is comprised in the rouble. Rouble, rouble, rouble!” I
sighed. “They are fond of getting money easily, for nothing, and in that
respect the better educated they are the more they are to be dreaded.”


My wife went to the couch and lay down.


“Ideas,” she brought out, listlessly and reluctantly, “ideas, ideals,
objects of life, principles....you always used to use those words when you
wanted to insult or humiliate some one, or say something unpleasant. Yes,
that’s your way: if with your views and such an attitude to people you are
allowed to take part in anything, you would destroy it from the first day.
It’s time you understand that.”


She sighed and paused.


“It’s coarseness of character, Pavel Andreitch,” she said. “You are
well-bred and educated, but what a... Scythian you are in reality! That’s
because you lead a cramped life full of hatred, see no one, and read
nothing but your engineering books. And, you know, there are good people,
good books! Yes... but I am exhausted and it wearies me to talk. I ought
to be in bed.”


“So I am going away, Natalie,” I said.


“Yes... yes.... Merci....”


I stood still for a little while, then went upstairs. An hour later—it
was half-past one—I went downstairs again with a candle in my hand
to speak to my wife. I didn’t know what I was going to say to her, but I
felt that I must say some thing very important and necessary. She was not
in her study, the door leading to her bedroom was closed.


“Natalie, are you asleep?” I asked softly.


There was no answer.


I stood near the door, sighed, and went into the drawing-room. There I sat
down on the sofa, put out the candle, and remained sitting in the dark
till the dawn.


VI


I went to the station at ten o’clock in the morning. There was no frost,
but snow was falling in big wet flakes and an unpleasant damp wind was
blowing.


We passed a pond and then a birch copse, and then began going uphill along
the road which I could see from my window. I turned round to take a last
look at my house, but I could see nothing for the snow. Soon afterwards
dark huts came into sight ahead of us as in a fog. It was Pestrovo.


“If I ever go out of my mind, Pestrovo will be the cause of it,” I
thought. “It persecutes me.”


We came out into the village street. All the roofs were intact, not one of
them had been pulled to pieces; so my bailiff had told a lie. A boy was
pulling along a little girl and a baby in a sledge. Another boy of three,
with his head wrapped up like a peasant woman’s and with huge mufflers on
his hands, was trying to catch the flying snowflakes on his tongue, and
laughing. Then a wagon loaded with fagots came toward us and a peasant
walking beside it, and there was no telling whether his beard was white or
whether it was covered with snow. He recognized my coachman, smiled at him
and said something, and mechanically took off his hat to me. The dogs ran
out of the yards and looked inquisitively at my horses. Everything was
quiet, ordinary, as usual. The emigrants had returned, there was no bread;
in the huts “some were laughing, some were delirious”; but it all looked
so ordinary that one could not believe it really was so. There were no
distracted faces, no voices whining for help, no weeping, nor abuse, but
all around was stillness, order, life, children, sledges, dogs with
dishevelled tails. Neither the children nor the peasant we met were
troubled; why was I so troubled?


Looking at the smiling peasant, at the boy with the huge mufflers, at the
huts, remembering my wife, I realized there was no calamity that could
daunt this people; I felt as though there were already a breath of victory
in the air. I felt proud and felt ready to cry out that I was with them
too; but the horses were carrying us away from the village into the open
country, the snow was whirling, the wind was howling, and I was left alone
with my thoughts. Of the million people working for the peasantry, life
itself had cast me out as a useless, incompetent, bad man. I was a
hindrance, a part of the people’s calamity; I was vanquished, cast out,
and I was hurrying to the station to go away and hide myself in Petersburg
in a hotel in Bolshaya Morskaya.


An hour later we reached the station. The coachman and a porter with a
disc on his breast carried my trunks into the ladies’ room. My coachman
Nikanor, wearing high felt boots and the skirt of his coat tucked up
through his belt, all wet with the snow and glad I was going away, gave me
a friendly smile and said:


“A fortunate journey, your Excellency. God give you luck.”


Every one, by the way, calls me “your Excellency,” though I am only a
collegiate councillor and a kammer-junker. The porter told me the train
had not yet left the next station; I had to wait. I went outside, and with
my head heavy from my sleepless night, and so exhausted I could hardly
move my legs, I walked aimlessly towards the pump. There was not a soul
anywhere near.


“Why am I going?” I kept asking myself. “What is there awaiting me there?
The acquaintances from whom I have come away, loneliness, restaurant
dinners, noise, the electric light, which makes my eyes ache. Where am I
going, and what am I going for? What am I going for?”


And it seemed somehow strange to go away without speaking to my wife. I
felt that I was leaving her in uncertainty. Going away, I ought to have
told that she was right, that I really was a bad man.


When I turned away from the pump, I saw in the doorway the station-master,
of whom I had twice made complaints to his superiors, turning up the
collar of his coat, shrinking from the wind and the snow. He came up to
me, and putting two fingers to the peak of his cap, told me with an
expression of helpless confusion, strained respectfulness, and hatred on
his face, that the train was twenty minutes late, and asked me would I not
like to wait in the warm?


“Thank you,” I answered, “but I am probably not going. Send word to my
coachman to wait; I have not made up my mind.”


I walked to and fro on the platform and thought, should I go away or not?
When the train came in I decided not to go. At home I had to expect my
wife’s amazement and perhaps her mockery, the dismal upper storey and my
uneasiness; but, still, at my age that was easier and as it were more
homelike than travelling for two days and nights with strangers to
Petersburg, where I should be conscious every minute that my life was of
no use to any one or to anything, and that it was approaching its end. No,
better at home whatever awaited me there.... I went out of the station. It
was awkward by daylight to return home, where every one was so glad at my
going. I might spend the rest of the day till evening at some neighbour’s,
but with whom? With some of them I was on strained relations, others I did
not know at all. I considered and thought of Ivan Ivanitch.


“We are going to Bragino!” I said to the coachman, getting into the
sledge.


“It’s a long way,” sighed Nikanor; “it will be twenty miles, or maybe
twenty-five.”


“Oh, please, my dear fellow,” I said in a tone as though Nikanor had the
right to refuse. “Please let us go!”


Nikanor shook his head doubtfully and said slowly that we really ought to
have put in the shafts, not Circassian, but Peasant or Siskin; and
uncertainly, as though expecting I should change my mind, took the reins
in his gloves, stood up, thought a moment, and then raised his whip.


“A whole series of inconsistent actions...” I thought, screening my face
from the snow. “I must have gone out of my mind. Well, I don’t care....”


In one place, on a very high and steep slope, Nikanor carefully held the
horses in to the middle of the descent, but in the middle the horses
suddenly bolted and dashed downhill at a fearful rate; he raised his
elbows and shouted in a wild, frantic voice such as I had never heard from
him before:


“Hey! Let’s give the general a drive! If you come to grief he’ll buy new
ones, my darlings! Hey! look out! We’ll run you down!”


Only now, when the extraordinary pace we were going at took my breath
away, I noticed that he was very drunk. He must have been drinking at the
station. At the bottom of the descent there was the crash of ice; a piece
of dirty frozen snow thrown up from the road hit me a painful blow in the
face.


The runaway horses ran up the hill as rapidly as they had downhill, and
before I had time to shout to Nikanor my sledge was flying along on the
level in an old pine forest, and the tall pines were stretching out their
shaggy white paws to me from all directions.


“I have gone out of my mind, and the coachman’s drunk,” I thought. “Good!”


I found Ivan Ivanitch at home. He laughed till he coughed, laid his head
on my breast, and said what he always did say on meeting me:


“You grow younger and younger. I don’t know what dye you use for your hair
and your beard; you might give me some of it.”


“I’ve come to return your call, Ivan Ivanitch,” I said untruthfully.
“Don’t be hard on me; I’m a townsman, conventional; I do keep count of
calls.”


“I am delighted, my dear fellow. I am an old man; I like respect.... Yes.”


From his voice and his blissfully smiling face, I could see that he was
greatly flattered by my visit. Two peasant women helped me off with my
coat in the entry, and a peasant in a red shirt hung it on a hook, and
when Ivan Ivanitch and I went into his little study, two barefooted little
girls were sitting on the floor looking at a picture-book; when they saw
us they jumped up and ran away, and a tall, thin old woman in spectacles
came in at once, bowed gravely to me, and picking up a pillow from the
sofa and a picture-book from the floor, went away. From the adjoining
rooms we heard incessant whispering and the patter of bare feet.


“I am expecting the doctor to dinner,” said Ivan Ivanitch. “He promised to
come from the relief centre. Yes. He dines with me every Wednesday, God
bless him.” He craned towards me and kissed me on the neck. “You have
come, my dear fellow, so you are not vexed,” he whispered, sniffing.
“Don’t be vexed, my dear creature. Yes. Perhaps it is annoying, but don’t
be cross. My only prayer to God before I die is to live in peace and
harmony with all in the true way. Yes.”


“Forgive me, Ivan Ivanitch, I will put my feet on a chair,” I said,
feeling that I was so exhausted I could not be myself; I sat further back
on the sofa and put up my feet on an arm-chair. My face was burning from
the snow and the wind, and I felt as though my whole body were basking in
the warmth and growing weaker from it.


“It’s very nice here,” I went on—“warm, soft, snug... and
goose-feather pens,” I laughed, looking at the writing-table; “sand
instead of blotting-paper.”


“Eh? Yes... yes.... The writing-table and the mahogany cupboard here were
made for my father by a self-taught cabinet-maker—Glyeb Butyga, a
serf of General Zhukov’s. Yes... a great artist in his own way.”


Listlessly and in the tone of a man dropping asleep, he began telling me
about cabinet-maker Butyga. I listened. Then Ivan Ivanitch went into the
next room to show me a polisander wood chest of drawers remarkable for its
beauty and cheapness. He tapped the chest with his fingers, then called my
attention to a stove of patterned tiles, such as one never sees now. He
tapped the stove, too, with his fingers. There was an atmosphere of
good-natured simplicity and well-fed abundance about the chest of drawers,
the tiled stove, the low chairs, the pictures embroidered in wool and silk
on canvas in solid, ugly frames. When one remembers that all those objects
were standing in the same places and precisely in the same order when I
was a little child, and used to come here to name-day parties with my
mother, it is simply unbelievable that they could ever cease to exist.


I thought what a fearful difference between Butyga and me! Butyga who made
things, above all, solidly and substantially, and seeing in that his chief
object, gave to length of life peculiar significance, had no thought of
death, and probably hardly believed in its possibility; I, when I built my
bridges of iron and stone which would last a thousand years, could not
keep from me the thought, “It’s not for long....it’s no use.” If in time
Butyga’s cupboard and my bridge should come under the notice of some
sensible historian of art, he would say: “These were two men remarkable in
their own way: Butyga loved his fellow-creatures and would not admit the
thought that they might die and be annihilated, and so when he made his
furniture he had the immortal man in his mind. The engineer Asorin did not
love life or his fellow-creatures; even in the happy moments of creation,
thoughts of death, of finiteness and dissolution, were not alien to him,
and we see how insignificant and finite, how timid and poor, are these
lines of his....”


“I only heat these rooms,” muttered Ivan Ivanitch, showing me his rooms.
“Ever since my wife died and my son was killed in the war, I have kept the
best rooms shut up. Yes... see...”


He opened a door, and I saw a big room with four columns, an old piano,
and a heap of peas on the floor; it smelt cold and damp.


“The garden seats are in the next room...” muttered Ivan Ivanitch.
“There’s no one to dance the mazurka now.... I’ve shut them up.”


We heard a noise. It was Dr. Sobol arriving. While he was rubbing his cold
hands and stroking his wet beard, I had time to notice in the first place
that he had a very dull life, and so was pleased to see Ivan Ivanitch and
me; and, secondly, that he was a naive and simple-hearted man. He looked
at me as though I were very glad to see him and very much interested in
him.


“I have not slept for two nights,” he said, looking at me naively and
stroking his beard. “One night with a confinement, and the next I stayed
at a peasant’s with the bugs biting me all night. I am as sleepy as Satan,
do you know.”


With an expression on his face as though it could not afford me anything
but pleasure, he took me by the arm and led me to the dining-room. His
naive eyes, his crumpled coat, his cheap tie and the smell of iodoform
made an unpleasant impression upon me; I felt as though I were in vulgar
company. When we sat down to table he filled my glass with vodka, and,
smiling helplessly, I drank it; he put a piece of ham on my plate and I
ate it submissively.


“Repetitia est mater studiorum,” said Sobol, hastening to drink off
another wineglassful. “Would you believe it, the joy of seeing good people
has driven away my sleepiness? I have turned into a peasant, a savage in
the wilds; I’ve grown coarse, but I am still an educated man, and I tell
you in good earnest, it’s tedious without company.”


They served first for a cold course white sucking-pig with horse-radish
cream, then a rich and very hot cabbage soup with pork on it, with boiled
buckwheat, from which rose a column of steam. The doctor went on talking,
and I was soon convinced that he was a weak, unfortunate man, disorderly
in external life. Three glasses of vodka made him drunk; he grew
unnaturally lively, ate a great deal, kept clearing his throat and
smacking his lips, and already addressed me in Italian, “Eccellenza.”
Looking naively at me as though he were convinced that I was very glad to
see and hear him, he informed me that he had long been separated from his
wife and gave her three-quarters of his salary; that she lived in the town
with his children, a boy and a girl, whom he adored; that he loved another
woman, a widow, well educated, with an estate in the country, but was
rarely able to see her, as he was busy with his work from morning till
night and had not a free moment.


“The whole day long, first at the hospital, then on my rounds,” he told
us; “and I assure you, Eccellenza, I have not time to read a book, let
alone going to see the woman I love. I’ve read nothing for ten years! For
ten years, Eccellenza. As for the financial side of the question, ask Ivan
Ivanitch: I have often no money to buy tobacco.”


“On the other hand, you have the moral satisfaction of your work,” I said.


“What?” he asked, and he winked. “No,” he said, “better let us drink.”


I listened to the doctor, and, after my invariable habit, tried to take
his measure by my usual classification—materialist, idealist, filthy
lucre, gregarious instincts, and so on; but no classification fitted him
even approximately; and strange to say, while I simply listened and looked
at him, he seemed perfectly clear to me as a person, but as soon as I
began trying to classify him he became an exceptionally complex,
intricate, and incomprehensible character in spite of all his candour and
simplicity. “Is that man,” I asked myself, “capable of wasting other
people’s money, abusing their confidence, being disposed to sponge on
them?” And now this question, which had once seemed to me grave and
important, struck me as crude, petty, and coarse.


Pie was served; then, I remember, with long intervals between, during
which we drank home-made liquors, they gave us a stew of pigeons, some
dish of giblets, roast sucking-pig, partridges, cauliflower, curd
dumplings, curd cheese and milk, jelly, and finally pancakes and jam. At
first I ate with great relish, especially the cabbage soup and the
buckwheat, but afterwards I munched and swallowed mechanically, smiling
helplessly and unconscious of the taste of anything. My face was burning
from the hot cabbage soup and the heat of the room. Ivan Ivanitch and
Sobol, too, were crimson.


“To the health of your wife,” said Sobol. “She likes me. Tell her her
doctor sends her his respects.”


“She’s fortunate, upon my word,” sighed Ivan Ivanitch. “Though she takes
no trouble, does not fuss or worry herself, she has become the most
important person in the whole district. Almost the whole business is in
her hands, and they all gather round her, the doctor, the District
Captains, and the ladies. With people of the right sort that happens of
itself. Yes.... The apple-tree need take no thought for the apple to grow
on it; it will grow of itself.”


“It’s only people who don’t care who take no thought,” said I.


“Eh? Yes...” muttered Ivan Ivanitch, not catching what I said, “that’s
true.... One must not worry oneself. Just so, just so.... Only do your
duty towards God and your neighbour, and then never mind what happens.”


“Eccellenza,” said Sobol solemnly, “just look at nature about us: if you
poke your nose or your ear out of your fur collar it will be frost-bitten;
stay in the fields for one hour, you’ll be buried in the snow; while the
village is just the same as in the days of Rurik, the same Petchenyegs and
Polovtsi. It’s nothing but being burnt down, starving, and struggling
against nature in every way. What was I saying? Yes! If one thinks about
it, you know, looks into it and analyses all this hotchpotch, if you will
allow me to call it so, it’s not life but more like a fire in a theatre!
Any one who falls down or screams with terror, or rushes about, is the
worst enemy of good order; one must stand up and look sharp, and not stir
a hair! There’s no time for whimpering and busying oneself with trifles.
When you have to deal with elemental forces you must put out force against
them, be firm and as unyielding as a stone. Isn’t that right,
grandfather?” He turned to Ivan Ivanitch and laughed. “I am no better than
a woman myself; I am a limp rag, a flabby creature, so I hate flabbiness.
I can’t endure petty feelings! One mopes, another is frightened, a third
will come straight in here and say: ‘Fie on you! Here you’ve guzzled a
dozen courses and you talk about the starving!’ That’s petty and stupid! A
fourth will reproach you, Eccellenza, for being rich. Excuse me,
Eccellenza,” he went on in a loud voice, laying his hand on his heart,
“but your having set our magistrate the task of hunting day and night for
your thieves—excuse me, that’s also petty on your part. I am a
little drunk, so that’s why I say this now, but you know, it is petty!”


“Who’s asking him to worry himself? I don’t understand!” I said, getting
up.


I suddenly felt unbearably ashamed and mortified, and I walked round the
table.


“Who asks him to worry himself? I didn’t ask him to.... Damn him!”


“They have arrested three men and let them go again. They turned out not
to be the right ones, and now they are looking for a fresh lot,” said
Sobol, laughing. “It’s too bad!”


“I did not ask him to worry himself,” said I, almost crying with
excitement. “What’s it all for? What’s it all for? Well, supposing I was
wrong, supposing I have done wrong, why do they try to put me more in the
wrong?”


“Come, come, come, come!” said Sobol, trying to soothe me. “Come! I have
had a drop, that is why I said it. My tongue is my enemy. Come,” he
sighed, “we have eaten and drunk wine, and now for a nap.”


He got up from the table, kissed Ivan Ivanitch on the head, and staggering
from repletion, went out of the dining-room. Ivan Ivanitch and I smoked in
silence.


“I don’t sleep after dinner, my dear,” said Ivan Ivanitch, “but you have a
rest in the lounge-room.”


I agreed. In the half-dark and warmly heated room they called the
lounge-room, there stood against the walls long, wide sofas, solid and
heavy, the work of Butyga the cabinet maker; on them lay high, soft, white
beds, probably made by the old woman in spectacles. On one of them Sobol,
without his coat and boots, already lay asleep with his face to the back
of the sofa; another bed was awaiting me. I took off my coat and boots,
and, overcome by fatigue, by the spirit of Butyga which hovered over the
quiet lounge-room, and by the light, caressing snore of Sobol, I lay down
submissively.


And at once I began dreaming of my wife, of her room, of the
station-master with his face full of hatred, the heaps of snow, a fire in
the theatre. I dreamed of the peasants who had stolen twenty sacks of rye
out of my barn.


“Anyway, it’s a good thing the magistrate let them go,” I said.


I woke up at the sound of my own voice, looked for a moment in perplexity
at Sobol’s broad back, at the buckles of his waistcoat, at his thick
heels, then lay down again and fell asleep.


When I woke up the second time it was quite dark. Sobol was asleep. There
was peace in my heart, and I longed to make haste home. I dressed and went
out of the lounge-room. Ivan Ivanitch was sitting in a big arm-chair in
his study, absolutely motionless, staring at a fixed point, and it was
evident that he had been in the same state of petrifaction all the while I
had been asleep.


“Good!” I said, yawning. “I feel as though I had woken up after breaking
the fast at Easter. I shall often come and see you now. Tell me, did my
wife ever dine here?”


“So-ome-ti-mes... sometimes,”’ muttered Ivan Ivanitch, making an effort to
stir. “She dined here last Saturday. Yes.... She likes me.”


After a silence I said:


“Do you remember, Ivan Ivanitch, you told me I had a disagreeable
character and that it was difficult to get on with me? But what am I to do
to make my character different?”


“I don’t know, my dear boy.... I’m a feeble old man, I can’t advise
you.... Yes.... But I said that to you at the time because I am fond of
you and fond of your wife, and I was fond of your father.... Yes. I shall
soon die, and what need have I to conceal things from you or to tell you
lies? So I tell you: I am very fond of you, but I don’t respect you. No, I
don’t respect you.”


He turned towards me and said in a breathless whisper:


“It’s impossible to respect you, my dear fellow. You look like a real man.
You have the figure and deportment of the French President Carnot—I
saw a portrait of him the other day in an illustrated paper... yes.... You
use lofty language, and you are clever, and you are high up in the service
beyond all reach, but haven’t real soul, my dear boy... there’s no
strength in it.”


“A Scythian, in fact,” I laughed. “But what about my wife? Tell me
something about my wife; you know her better.”


I wanted to talk about my wife, but Sobol came in and prevented me.


“I’ve had a sleep and a wash,” he said, looking at me naively. “I’ll have
a cup of tea with some rum in it and go home.”


VII


It was by now past seven. Besides Ivan Ivanitch, women servants, the old
dame in spectacles, the little girls and the peasant, all accompanied us
from the hall out on to the steps, wishing us good-bye and all sorts of
blessings, while near the horses in the darkness there were standing and
moving about men with lanterns, telling our coachmen how and which way to
drive, and wishing us a lucky journey. The horses, the men, and the
sledges were white.


“Where do all these people come from?” I asked as my three horses and the
doctor’s two moved at a walking pace out of the yard.


“They are all his serfs,” said Sobol. “The new order has not reached him
yet. Some of the old servants are living out their lives with him, and
then there are orphans of all sorts who have nowhere to go; there are
some, too, who insist on living there, there’s no turning them out. A
queer old man!”


Again the flying horses, the strange voice of drunken Nikanor, the wind
and the persistent snow, which got into one’s eyes, one’s mouth, and every
fold of one’s fur coat....


“Well, I am running a rig,” I thought, while my bells chimed in with the
doctor’s, the wind whistled, the coachmen shouted; and while this frantic
uproar was going on, I recalled all the details of that strange wild day,
unique in my life, and it seemed to me that I really had gone out of my
mind or become a different man. It was as though the man I had been till
that day were already a stranger to me.


The doctor drove behind and kept talking loudly with his coachman. From
time to time he overtook me, drove side by side, and always, with the same
naive confidence that it was very pleasant to me, offered me a cigarette
or asked for the matches. Or, overtaking me, he would lean right out of
his sledge, and waving about the sleeves of his fur coat, which were at
least twice as long as his arms, shout:


“Go it, Vaska! Beat the thousand roublers! Hey, my kittens!”


And to the accompaniment of loud, malicious laughter from Sobol and his
Vaska the doctor’s kittens raced ahead. My Nikanor took it as an affront,
and held in his three horses, but when the doctor’s bells had passed out
of hearing, he raised his elbows, shouted, and our horses flew like mad in
pursuit. We drove into a village, there were glimpses of lights, the
silhouettes of huts. Some one shouted:


“Ah, the devils!” We seemed to have galloped a mile and a half, and still
it was the village street and there seemed no end to it. When we caught up
the doctor and drove more quietly, he asked for matches and said:


“Now try and feed that street! And, you know, there are five streets like
that, sir. Stay, stay,” he shouted. “Turn in at the tavern! We must get
warm and let the horses rest.”


They stopped at the tavern.


“I have more than one village like that in my district,” said the doctor,
opening a heavy door with a squeaky block, and ushering me in front of
him. “If you look in broad daylight you can’t see to the end of the
street, and there are side-streets, too, and one can do nothing but
scratch one’s head. It’s hard to do anything.”


We went into the best room where there was a strong smell of table-cloths,
and at our entrance a sleepy peasant in a waistcoat and a shirt worn
outside his trousers jumped up from a bench. Sobol asked for some beer and
I asked for tea.


“It’s hard to do anything,” said Sobol. “Your wife has faith; I respect
her and have the greatest reverence for her, but I have no great faith
myself. As long as our relations to the people continue to have the
character of ordinary philanthropy, as shown in orphan asylums and
almshouses, so long we shall only be shuffling, shamming, and deceiving
ourselves, and nothing more. Our relations ought to be businesslike,
founded on calculation, knowledge, and justice. My Vaska has been working
for me all his life; his crops have failed, he is sick and starving. If I
give him fifteen kopecks a day, by so doing I try to restore him to his
former condition as a workman; that is, I am first and foremost looking
after my own interests, and yet for some reason I call that fifteen
kopecks relief, charity, good works. Now let us put it like this. On the
most modest computation, reckoning seven kopecks a soul and five souls a
family, one needs three hundred and fifty roubles a day to feed a thousand
families. That sum is fixed by our practical duty to a thousand families.
Meanwhile we give not three hundred and fifty a day, but only ten, and say
that that is relief, charity, that that makes your wife and all of us
exceptionally good people and hurrah for our humaneness. That is it, my
dear soul! Ah! if we would talk less of being humane and calculated more,
reasoned, and took a conscientious attitude to our duties! How many such
humane, sensitive people there are among us who tear about in all good
faith with subscription lists, but don’t pay their tailors or their cooks.
There is no logic in our life; that’s what it is! No logic!”


We were silent for a while. I was making a mental calculation and said:


“I will feed a thousand families for two hundred days. Come and see me
tomorrow to talk it over.”


I was pleased that this was said quite simply, and was glad that Sobol
answered me still more simply:


“Right.”


We paid for what we had and went out of the tavern.


“I like going on like this,” said Sobol, getting into the sledge.
“Eccellenza, oblige me with a match. I’ve forgotten mine in the tavern.”


A quarter of an hour later his horses fell behind, and the sound of his
bells was lost in the roar of the snow-storm. Reaching home, I walked
about my rooms, trying to think things over and to define my position
clearly to myself; I had not one word, one phrase, ready for my wife. My
brain was not working.


But without thinking of anything, I went downstairs to my wife. She was in
her room, in the same pink dressing-gown, and standing in the same
attitude as though screening her papers from me. On her face was an
expression of perplexity and irony, and it was evident that having heard
of my arrival, she had prepared herself not to cry, not to entreat me, not
to defend herself, as she had done the day before, but to laugh at me, to
answer me contemptuously, and to act with decision. Her face was saying:
“If that’s how it is, good-bye.”


“Natalie, I’ve not gone away,” I said, “but it’s not deception. I have
gone out of my mind; I’ve grown old, I’m ill, I’ve become a different man—think
as you like.... I’ve shaken off my old self with horror, with horror; I
despise him and am ashamed of him, and the new man who has been in me
since yesterday will not let me go away. Do not drive me away, Natalie!”


She looked intently into my face and believed me, and there was a gleam of
uneasiness in her eyes. Enchanted by her presence, warmed by the warmth of
her room, I muttered as in delirium, holding out my hands to her:


“I tell you, I have no one near to me but you. I have never for one minute
ceased to miss you, and only obstinate vanity prevented me from owning it.
The past, when we lived as husband and wife, cannot be brought back, and
there’s no need; but make me your servant, take all my property, and give
it away to any one you like. I am at peace, Natalie, I am content.... I am
at peace.”


My wife, looking intently and with curiosity into my face, suddenly
uttered a faint cry, burst into tears, and ran into the next room. I went
upstairs to my own storey.


An hour later I was sitting at my table, writing my “History of Railways,”
and the starving peasants did not now hinder me from doing so. Now I feel
no uneasiness. Neither the scenes of disorder which I saw when I went the
round of the huts at Pestrovo with my wife and Sobol the other day, nor
malignant rumours, nor the mistakes of the people around me, nor old age
close upon me—nothing disturbs me. Just as the flying bullets do not
hinder soldiers from talking of their own affairs, eating and cleaning
their boots, so the starving peasants do not hinder me from sleeping
quietly and looking after my personal affairs. In my house and far around
it there is in full swing the work which Dr. Sobol calls “an orgy of
philanthropy.” My wife often comes up to me and looks about my rooms
uneasily, as though looking for what more she can give to the starving
peasants “to justify her existence,” and I see that, thanks to her, there
will soon be nothing of our property left and we shall be poor; but that
does not trouble me, and I smile at her gaily. What will happen in the
future I don’t know.